  
  
An Act relating to copyright and the protection of 
certain performances, and for other purposes
Part I—Preliminary
  
1  Short title
This Act may be cited as the Copyright Act 1968.
2  Commencement
This Act shall come into operation on a date to be fixed by 
Proclamation.
4  Extension to external Territories
This Act extends to every external Territory.
5  Exclusion of Imperial Copyright Act, 1911
(1) This Act operates to the exclusion of the Copyright Act, 1911.
(2) For the purposes of section 8 of the Acts Interpretation Act 
1901-1966, the Copyright Act, 1911 shall be deemed to be an Act 
passed by the Parliament of the Commonwealth and to be repealed 
by this Act, and the enactment of Part XI shall not be taken to 
affect the operation of section 8 of the Acts Interpretation Act 
1901-1966 as it operates by virtue of this subsection in relation to 
matters to which that Part does not apply.
6  Repeal of Copyright Acts
The following Acts are repealed:
Copyright Act 1912;
Copyright Act 1933;
  
  
Copyright Act 1935;
Copyright Act 1963.
7  Act to bind the Crown
Subject to Part VII, this Act binds the Crown but nothing in this 
Act renders the Crown liable to be prosecuted for an offence.
8  Copyright not to subsist except by virtue of this Act
Subject to section 8A, copyright does not subsist otherwise than by 
virtue of this Act.
8A  Prerogative rights of the Crown in the nature of copyright
(1) Subject to subsection (2), this Act does not affect any prerogative 
right or privilege of the Crown.
(2) Where a right or privilege of the Crown by way of copyright 
subsists in a work or published edition of a work, a person does not 
infringe that right or privilege by doing, or authorizing the doing 
of, an act in relation to the work or edition without the licence of 
the Crown if, assuming that that right or privilege of the Crown did 
not subsist in the work or edition, but copyright subsisted under 
this Act in the work or edition and was owned by a person other 
than the Crown, the person would not infringe the copyright of that 
owner in the work or edition by doing, or by authorizing the doing 
of, that act without the licence of the owner.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) shall be taken to limit the duration of the 
right or privilege of the Crown by way of copyright in a work or 
published edition of a work.
9  Operation of other laws
(1) This Act does not affect the right of, or of a person deriving title 
directly or indirectly from, the Commonwealth or a State to sell, 
use or otherwise deal with articles that have been, or are, forfeited 
under a law of the Commonwealth or of the State.
  
  
(3) This Act does not affect the operation of the law relating to 
breaches of trust or confidence.
9A  Application of the Criminal Code
Chapter 2 of the Criminal Code applies to all offences against this 
Act.
Note: Chapter 2 of the Criminal Code sets out the general principles of 
criminal responsibility.
  
  
Part II—Interpretation
  
10  Interpretation 
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
access control technological protection measure means a device, 
product, technology or component (including a computer program) 
that:
(a) is used in Australia or a qualifying country:
(i) by, with the permission of, or on behalf of, the owner or 
the exclusive licensee of the copyright in a work or 
other subject-matter; and
(ii) in connection with the exercise of the copyright; and
(b) in the normal course of its operation, controls access to the 
work or other subject-matter;
but does not include such a device, product, technology or 
component to the extent that it:
(c) if the work or other subject-matter is a cinematograph film or 
computer program (including a computer game)—controls 
geographic market segmentation by preventing the playback 
in Australia of a non-infringing copy of the work or other 
subject-matter acquired outside Australia; or
(d) if the work is a computer program that is embodied in a 
machine or device—restricts the use of goods (other than the 
work) or services in relation to the machine or device.
For the purposes of this definition, computer program has the 
same meaning as in section 47AB.
accessory, in relation to an article, means one or more of the 
following:
(a) a label affixed to, displayed on, incorporated into the surface 
of, or accompanying, the article;
(b) the packaging or container in which the article is packaged or 
contained;
  
  
(c) a label affixed to, displayed on, incorporated into the surface 
of, or accompanying, the packaging or container in which the 
article is packaged or contained;
(d) a written instruction, warranty or other information provided 
with the article;
(e) a record embodying an instructional sound recording, or a 
copy of an instructional cinematograph film, provided with 
the article;
but does not include any label, packaging or container on which the 
olympic symbol (within the meaning of the Olympic Insignia 
Protection Act 1987) is reproduced.
Note: See also section 10AD for an expanded meaning of accessory in 
relation to certain imported articles.
adaptation means:
(a) in relation to a literary work in a non-dramatic form a version 
of the work (whether in its original language or in a different 
language) in a dramatic form;
(b) in relation to a literary work in a dramatic form a version of 
the work (whether in its original language or in a different 
language) in a non-dramatic form;
(ba) in relation to a literary work being a computer program—a 
version of the work (whether or not in the language, code or 
notation in which the work was originally expressed) not 
being a reproduction of the work;
(c) in relation to a literary work (whether in a non-dramatic form 
or in a dramatic form):
(i) a translation of the work; or
(ii) a version of the work in which a story or action is 
conveyed solely or principally by means of pictures; and
(d) in relation to a musical work—an arrangement or 
transcription of the work.
alternative dispute resolution processes means procedures and 
services for the resolution of disputes, and includes:
(a) conferencing; and
(b) mediation; and
  
  
(c) neutral evaluation; and
(d) case appraisal; and
(e) conciliation; and
(f) procedures or services specified in the regulations;
but does not include:
(g) arbitration; or
(h) court procedures or services.
Paragraphs (b) to (f) of this definition do not limit paragraph (a) of 
this definition.
approved label means a label approved under:
(a) Part 2 of the Agvet Code of a State or of the Northern 
Territory; or
(b) Part 2 of the Agvet Code of the participating Territories 
within the meaning of the Agricultural and Veterinary 
Chemicals Act 1994.
archives means:
(a) archival material in the custody of:
(i) the National Archives of Australia; or
(ii) the Archives Office of New South Wales established by 
the Archives Act 1960 of the State of New South Wales; 
or
(iii) the Public Record Office established by the Public 
Records Act 1973 of the State of Victoria; or
(iv) the Archives Office of Tasmania established by the 
Archives Act 1965 of the State of Tasmania; or
(aa) archival material in the custody of a person (other than the 
National Archives of Australia) in accordance with an 
arrangement referred to in section 64 of the Archives Act 
1983; or
(b) a collection of documents or other material to which this 
paragraph applies by virtue of subsection (4).
artistic work means:
  
  
(a) a painting, sculpture, drawing, engraving or photograph, 
whether the work is of artistic quality or not;
(b) a building or a model of a building, whether the building or 
model is of artistic quality or not; or
(c) a work of artistic craftsmanship whether or not mentioned in 
paragraph (a) or (b);
but does not include a circuit layout within the meaning of the 
Circuit Layouts Act 1989.
Australia includes the external Territories.
author, in relation to a photograph, means the person who took the 
photograph.
authorized officer, in relation to a library or archives, means the 
officer in charge of that library or archives or a person authorized 
by that officer to act on his or her behalf.
available online, in relation to National Library material, has the 
meaning given by section 195CF.
body administering:
(a) an institution—means:
(i) if the institution is a body corporate—the institution; or
(ii) otherwise—the body or person (including the Crown) 
having ultimate responsibility for administering the 
institution; or
(b) a library or archives—means:
(i) if the library or archives is an archives covered by 
paragraph (aa) of the definition of archives—the person 
having the custody of the archives in accordance with 
the relevant arrangement mentioned in that paragraph; 
or
(ii) otherwise—the body (whether incorporated or not) or 
person (including the Crown) having ultimate 
responsibility for administering the library or archives.
  
  
broadcast means a communication to the public delivered by a 
broadcasting service within the meaning of the Broadcasting 
Services Act 1992. For the purposes of the application of this 
definition to a service provided under a satellite BSA licence, 
assume that there is no conditional access system that relates to the 
service.
Note: A broadcasting service does not include the following:
(a) a service (including a teletext service) that provides only data or 
only text (with or without associated images); or
(b) a service that makes programs available on demand on a 
point-to-point basis, including a dial-up service.
broadcasts collecting society means the body declared to be a 
collecting society by a declaration that is in force under 
section 113V and to which subparagraph 113V(4)(a)(ii) applies.
building includes a structure of any kind.
carriage service provider has the same meaning as in the 
Telecommunications Act 1997.
carrier has the same meaning as in the Telecommunications Act 
1997.
chemical product has the same meaning as in the Schedule to the 
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994.
cinematograph film means the aggregate of the visual images 
embodied in an article or thing so as to be capable by the use of 
that article or thing:
(a) of being shown as a moving picture; or
(b) of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of 
which it can be so shown;
and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a 
sound-track associated with such visual images.
circumvention device for a technological protection measure 
means a device, component or product (including a computer 
program) that:
  
  
(a) is promoted, advertised or marketed as having the purpose or 
use of circumventing the technological protection measure; 
or
(b) has only a limited commercially significant purpose or use, 
or no such purpose or use, other than the circumvention of 
the technological protection measure; or
(c) is primarily or solely designed or produced to enable or 
facilitate the circumvention of the technological protection 
measure.
For the purposes of this definition, computer program has the 
same meaning as in section 47AB.
circumvention service for a technological protection measure 
means a service that:
(a) is promoted, advertised or marketed as having the purpose or 
use of circumventing the technological protection measure; 
or
(b) has only a limited commercially significant purpose or use, 
or no such purpose or use, other than the circumvention of 
the technological protection measure; or
(c) is primarily or solely designed or produced to enable or 
facilitate the circumvention of the technological protection 
measure.
collecting society means:
(a) a works collecting society; or
(b) the broadcasts collecting society; or
(c) a body that a declaration in force under section 135ZZT 
declares to be a collecting society for the purposes of 
Part VC; or
(d)  a body that a declaration in force under section 135ZZZO 
declares to be a collecting society for the purposes of 
Part VD; or
(e) a company that a declaration in force under section 153F 
declares to be a collecting society for the purposes of 
Division 2 of Part VII.
  
  
communicate means make available online or electronically 
transmit (whether over a path, or a combination of paths, provided 
by a material substance or otherwise) a work or other 
subject-matter, including a performance or live performance within 
the meaning of this Act.
computer program means a set of statements or instructions to be 
used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a 
certain result.
construction includes erection, and reconstruction has a 
corresponding meaning.
controls access: a device, product, technology or component 
(including a computer program) controls access to a work or other 
subject-matter if it requires the application of information or a 
process, with the permission of the owner or exclusive licensee of 
the copyright in the work or other subject-matter, to gain access to 
the work or other subject-matter.
copy:
(a) of a work—means a reproduction; or
(b) of a sound recording—means a record embodying the sound 
recording, or a substantial part of the sound recording, 
derived directly or indirectly from a record produced on the 
making of the sound recording; or
Note: See also subsection (6).
(c) of a cinematograph film—means any article or thing in 
which the visual images or sounds comprising the film are 
embodied; or
Note: See also subsection (5).
(d) of a broadcast—includes:
(i) a record embodying a sound recording of the whole or a 
part of the broadcast; or
(ii) a copy of a cinematograph film of the whole or a part of 
the broadcast.
copyright material means anything in which copyright subsists.
  
  
Note: This definition does not apply in Subdivision E of Division 3 of 
Part VI or Division 2 of Part VII (use of copyright material for the 
Crown): see sections 153DF and 182B.
delivery period has the meaning given by subsection 195CD(2).
device includes a plate.
dramatic work includes:
(a) a choreographic show or other dumb show; and
(b) a scenario or script for a cinematograph film;
but does not include a cinematograph film as distinct from the 
scenario or script for a cinematograph film.
drawing includes a diagram, map, chart or plan.
educational institution means:
(aa) an institution at which education is provided at pre-school or 
kindergarten standard; or
(a) a school or similar institution at which full-time primary 
education or full-time secondary education is provided or 
both full-time primary education and full-time secondary 
education are provided; or
(b) a university, a college of advanced education or a technical 
and further education institution; or
(c) an institution that conducts courses of primary, secondary or 
tertiary education by correspondence or on an external study 
basis; or
(d) a school of nursing; or
(e) an undertaking within a hospital, if the undertaking conducts 
courses of study or training in the provision of:
(i) medical services; or
(ii) services incidental to the provision of medical services; 
or
(f) a teacher education centre; or
(g) an institution with the principal function of providing courses 
of study or training for any of the following purposes:
(i) general education;
  
  
(ii) the preparation of people for a particular occupation or 
profession;
(iii) the continuing education of people engaged in a 
particular occupation or profession;
(iv) the teaching of English to people whose first language is 
not English; or
(h) an undertaking within a body administering an educational 
institution, if:
(i) the educational institution is of a kind referred to in a 
preceding paragraph of this definition; and
(ii) the principal function, or one of the principal functions, 
of the undertaking is the provision of teacher training to 
people engaged as instructors in educational institutions 
of a kind mentioned in a preceding paragraph of this 
definition, or of 2 or more such kinds; or
(i) an institution, or an undertaking within a body administering 
an educational institution of a kind referred to in a preceding 
paragraph of this definition, if:
(i) the principal function, or one of the principal functions, 
of the institution, or undertaking, is the providing of 
material to educational institutions of a kind referred to 
in a preceding paragraph of this definition, or 2 or more 
such kinds; and
(ii) that activity is undertaken for the purpose of helping 
those institutions in their teaching purposes.
electronic literary or music item means:
(a) a book in electronic form; or
(b) a periodical publication in electronic form; or
(c) sheet music in electronic form;
regardless of whether there is a printed form.
electronic rights management information, in relation to a work 
or other subject-matter, means information that:
(a) is electronic; and
(b) either:
  
  
(i) is or was attached to, or is or was embodied in, a copy 
of the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) appears or appeared in connection with a 
communication, or the making available, of the work or 
subject-matter; and
(c) either:
(i) identifies the work or subject-matter, and its author or 
copyright owner (including such information 
represented as numbers or codes); or
(ii) identifies or indicates some or all of the terms and 
conditions on which the work or subject-matter may be 
used, or indicates that the use of the work or 
subject-matter is subject to terms or conditions 
(including such information represented as numbers or 
codes).
eligible rights holder has the meaning given by 
subsection 113V(9).
engraving includes an etching, lithograph, product of 
photogravure, woodcut, print or similar work, not being a 
photograph.
exclusive licence means a licence in writing, signed by or on 
behalf of the owner or prospective owner of copyright, authorizing 
the licensee, to the exclusion of all other persons, to do an act that, 
by virtue of this Act, the owner of the copyright would, but for the 
licence, have the exclusive right to do, and exclusive licensee has a 
corresponding meaning.
free-to-air broadcast means:
(a) a broadcast delivered by a national broadcasting service, 
commercial broadcasting service or community broadcasting 
service within the meaning of the Broadcasting Services Act 
1992; or
(b) a broadcast delivered by a broadcasting service within the 
meaning of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 that does no 
  
  
more than transmit program material supplied by National 
Indigenous TV Limited.
future copyright means copyright to come into existence at a 
future time or upon the happening of a future event.
generally known: without limiting when the identity of the author 
of a work is generally known, the identity is generally known if it 
can be ascertained by reasonable enquiry.
government has the meaning given by subsection 182B(1).
government copy has the meaning given by subsection 182B(1).
infringing copy means:
(a) in relation to a work—a reproduction of the work, or of an 
adaptation of the work, not being a copy of a cinematograph 
film of the work or adaptation;
(b) in relation to a sound recording—a copy of the sound 
recording not being a sound-track associated with visual 
images forming part of a cinematograph film;
(c) in relation to a cinematograph film—a copy of the film;
(d) in relation to a television broadcast or a sound broadcast—a 
copy of a cinematograph film of the broadcast or a record 
embodying a sound recording of the broadcast; and
(e) in relation to a published edition of a work—a facsimile copy 
of the edition;
being an article (which may be an electronic reproduction or copy 
of the work, recording, film, broadcast or edition) the making of 
which constituted an infringement of the copyright in the work, 
recording, film, broadcast or edition or, in the case of an article 
imported without the licence of the owner of the copyright, would 
have constituted an infringement of that copyright if the article had 
been made in Australia by the importer, but does not include:
(f) a non-infringing book whose importation does not constitute 
an infringement of that copyright; or
(g) a non-infringing accessory whose importation does not 
constitute an infringement of that copyright; or
  
  
(h) a non-infringing copy of a sound recording whose 
importation does not infringe that copyright; or
(i) a non-infringing copy of a computer program whose 
importation does not infringe that copyright; or
(j) a non-infringing copy of an electronic literary or music item 
whose importation does not infringe that copyright.
institution includes an educational institution.
international agreement means:
(a) a convention to which Australia is a party; or
(b) an agreement or arrangement between Australia and a foreign 
country, including an agreement, arrangement or 
understanding between a Minister and an official or authority 
of a foreign country.
international organization to which this Act applies means an 
organization that is declared by regulations made for the purposes 
of section 186 to be an international organization to which this Act 
applies, and includes:
(a) an organ of, or office within, an organization that is so 
declared; and
(b) a commission, council or other body established by such an 
organization or organ.
judicial proceeding means a proceeding before a court, tribunal or 
person having by law power to hear, receive and examine evidence 
on oath.
key cultural institution has the meaning given by section 113L.
law of the Commonwealth includes a law of a Territory.
licensed copying or communicating has the meaning given by 
subsection 113Q(2).
literary work includes:
(a) a table, or compilation, expressed in words, figures or 
symbols; and
  
  
(b) a computer program or compilation of computer programs.
made public has a meaning affected by section 29A.
manuscript, in relation to a literary, dramatic or musical work, 
means the document embodying the work as initially prepared by 
the author, whether the document is in hardcopy form, electronic 
form or any other form.
material form, in relation to a work or an adaptation of a work, 
includes any form (whether visible or not) of storage of the work or 
adaptation, or a substantial part of the work or adaptation, (whether 
or not the work or adaptation, or a substantial part of the work or 
adaptation, can be reproduced).
National Library material has the meaning given by 
section 195CE.
National Library Minister means the Minister administering the 
National Library Act 1960.
non-infringing accessory means an accessory made in:
(a) a country that is a party to the International Convention for 
the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works concluded at 
Berne on 9 September 1886 as revised from time to time; or
(b) a country that is a member of the World Trade Organization 
and has a law that provides consistently with the TRIPS 
Agreement for:
(i) the ownership and duration of copyright or a related 
right in works, sound recordings and cinematograph 
films; and
(ii) the owner of the copyright or related right to have rights 
relating to the reproduction of the work, sound 
recording or cinematograph film;
where:
(c) the making of any copy of a work, or any reproduction of a 
published edition of a work, that is, or is on, or is embodied 
in, the accessory; or
  
  
(d) the making of any record embodying a sound recording, or 
any copy of a cinematograph film, that is the accessory;
was authorised by the owner of the copyright in that country in the 
work, edition, recording or film, as the case may be.
non-infringing book means a book made (otherwise than under a 
compulsory licence) in a country specified in regulations made for 
the purposes of subsection 184(1), being a book whose making did 
not constitute an infringement of any copyright subsisting in a 
work, or in a published edition of a work, under a law of that 
country.
non-infringing copy:
(a) in relation to a sound recording, has the meaning given by 
section 10AA; and
(b) in relation to a computer program, has the meaning given by 
section 10AB; and
(c) in relation to an electronic literary or music item, has the 
meaning given by section 10AC.
officer in charge means:
(a) in relation to archives—the archivist or other person having, 
for the time being, immediate care and control of the 
collection comprising the archives; and
(c) in relation to a library—the librarian or other person having, 
for the time being, immediate care and control of the 
collection comprising the library.
organisation assisting persons with a disability means:
(a) an educational institution; or
(b) a not-for-profit organisation with a principal function of 
providing assistance to persons with a disability (whether or 
not the organisation has other principal functions).
original form: a library or archives holds copyright material in 
original form if the material is held in the collection comprising 
the library or archives in a form that embodies the material as 
initially prepared by the author or maker of the material.
  
  
Example: A manuscript of a literary, dramatic or musical work.
Note: This definition does not apply in Division 6 of Part III: see 
subsection 54(6).
Parliament: see section 12.
person with a disability means a person with a disability that 
causes the person difficulty in reading, viewing, hearing or 
comprehending copyright material in a particular form.
photograph means a product of photography or of a process 
similar to photography, other than an article or thing in which 
visual images forming part of a cinematograph film have been 
embodied, and includes a product of xerography, and photographic 
has a corresponding meaning.
plate includes a stereotype, stone, block, mould, matrix, transfer, 
negative or other similar appliance.
private and domestic use means private and domestic use on or off 
domestic premises.
prospective owner means:
(a) in relation to a future copyright that is not the subject of an 
agreement of a kind referred to in subsection 197(1)—the 
person who will be the owner of the copyright on its coming 
into existence; or
(b) in relation to a future copyright that is the subject of such an 
agreement—the person in whom, by virtue of that subsection, 
the copyright will vest on its coming into existence.
qualifying country means:
(a) a country that is a party to the International Convention for 
the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works concluded at 
Berne on 9 September 1886 as revised from time to time; or
(b) a country that is a member of the World Trade Organization 
and has a law that provides consistently with the TRIPS 
Agreement for:
  
  
(i) the ownership and duration of copyright or a related 
right in works, sound recordings and cinematograph 
films; and
(ii) the owner of the copyright or related right to have rights 
relating to the reproduction of the work, sound 
recording or cinematograph film.
reception equipment means equipment whose operation, either 
alone or together with other equipment, enables people to hear or 
see a work or other subject-matter that is communicated.
record includes a disc, tape, paper, electronic file or other device in 
which sounds are embodied.
record embodying a sound recording means:
(a) a record produced upon the making of the sound recording; 
or
(b) a record that:
(i) embodies the sound recording; and
(ii) is derived directly or indirectly from a record produced 
upon the making of the sound recording.
registered charity means an entity that is registered under the 
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Act 2012 as 
the type of entity mentioned in column 1 of item 1 of the table in 
subsection 25-5(5) of that Act.
Registrar means the Registrar of the Tribunal provided for by 
section 170.
remuneration notice means:
(a) a notice mentioned in section 113Q; or
(b) a notice mentioned in section 135ZZL; or
(c) a notice mentioned in section 135ZZZJ.
retransmission, in relation to a broadcast, means a retransmission 
of the broadcast, where:
  
  
(a) the content of the broadcast is unaltered (even if the 
technique used to achieve retransmission is different to the 
technique used to achieve the original transmission); and
(b) either:
(i) in any case—the retransmission is simultaneous with 
the original transmission; or
(ii) if the retransmission is in an area that has, wholly or 
partly, different local time to the area of the original 
transmission—the retransmission is delayed until no 
later than the equivalent local time.
rules, of a collecting society, means the constitution of the society.
satellite BSA licence means a commercial television broadcasting 
licence allocated under section 38C of the Broadcasting Services 
Act 1992.
satellite BSA licensee means the licensee of a satellite BSA 
licence.
sculpture includes a cast or model made for purposes of sculpture.
simulcasting means simultaneously broadcasting a broadcasting 
service in both analog and digital form in accordance with the 
requirements of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 or of any 
prescribed legislative provisions relating to digital broadcasting.
sound broadcast means sounds broadcast otherwise than as part of 
a television broadcast.
sound recording means the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a 
record.
sound-track, in relation to visual images forming part of a 
cinematograph film, means:
(a) the part of any article or thing, being an article or thing in 
which those visual images are embodied, in which sounds are 
embodied; or
(b) a disc, tape or other device in which sounds are embodied 
and which is made available by the maker of the film for use 
  
  
in conjunction with the article or thing in which those visual 
images are embodied.
sufficient acknowledgement, in relation to a work, means an 
acknowledgement identifying the work by its title or other 
description and, unless the work is anonymous or pseudonymous 
or the author has previously agreed or directed that an 
acknowledgement of his or her name is not to be made, also 
identifying the author.
technological protection measure means:
(a) an access control technological protection measure; or
(b) a device, product, technology or component (including a 
computer program) that:
(i) is used in Australia or a qualifying country by, with the 
permission of, or on behalf of, the owner or the 
exclusive licensee of the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(ii) in the normal course of its operation, prevents, inhibits 
or restricts the doing of an act comprised in the 
copyright;
but does not include such a device, product, technology or 
component to the extent that it:
(iii) if the work or other subject-matter is a cinematograph 
film or computer program (including a computer 
game)—controls geographic market segmentation by 
preventing the playback in Australia of a non-infringing 
copy of the work or other subject-matter acquired 
outside Australia; or
(iv) if the work is a computer program that is embodied in a 
machine or device—restricts the use of goods (other 
than the work) or services in relation to the machine or 
device.
For the purposes of this definition, computer program has the 
same meaning as in section 47AB.
  
  
television broadcast means visual images broadcast by way of 
television, together with any sounds broadcast for reception along 
with those images.
the Australian Broadcasting Commission means the Australian 
Broadcasting Commission that was established under the 
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942.
the Australian Broadcasting Corporation means the Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation established under the Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983.
the Commonwealth includes the Administration of a Territory.
the Copyright Act, 1911 means the Imperial Act known as the 
Copyright Act, 1911.
the Copyright Tribunal or the Tribunal means the Copyright 
Tribunal of Australia provided for by Part VI, and includes a 
member of that Tribunal exercising powers of that Tribunal.
the Crown includes the Crown in right of a State and the Crown in 
right of the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory 
and also includes the Administration of a Territory other than the 
Australian Capital Territory or the Northern Territory.
the National Library means the National Library established under 
the National Library Act 1960-1967.
the Special Broadcasting Service means the Special Broadcasting 
Service that was referred to in section 5 of the Special 
Broadcasting Service Act 1991.
the Special Broadcasting Service Corporation means the body 
corporate preserved and continued in existence as the Special 
Broadcasting Service Corporation under section 5 of the Special 
Broadcasting Service Act 1991.
to the public means to the public within or outside Australia.
  
  
TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights set out in Annex 1C to the 
Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization, 
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994.
Note: The English text of the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World 
Trade Organization is set out in Australian Treaty Series 1995 No. 8.
will includes a codicil.
work means a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work.
work of joint authorship means a work that has been produced by 
the collaboration of two or more authors and in which the 
contribution of each author is not separate from the contribution of 
the other author or the contributions of the other authors.
works collecting society means a body declared to be a collecting 
society by a declaration that is in force under section 113V and to 
which subparagraph 113V(4)(a)(i) applies.
writing means a mode of representing or reproducing words, 
figures or symbols in a visible form, and written has a 
corresponding meaning.
(1A) Without limiting the meaning of the expression educational 
purposes in this Act, a copy of the whole or a part of a work or 
other subject-matter shall be taken, for the purposes of the 
provision in which the expression appears, to have been made, 
used or retained, as the case may be, for the educational purposes 
of an educational institution if:
(a) it is made or retained for use, or is used, in connection with a 
particular course of instruction provided by the institution; or
(b) it is made or retained for inclusion, or is included, in the 
collection of a library of the institution.
(2) Without limiting the meaning of the expression reasonable portion 
in this Act, where a literary, dramatic or musical work (other than a 
computer program) is contained in a published edition of that 
work, being an edition of not less than 10 pages, a copy of part of 
that work, as it appears in that edition, shall be taken to contain 
  
  
only a reasonable portion of that work if the pages that are copied 
in the edition:
(a) do not exceed, in the aggregate, 10% of the number of pages 
in that edition; or
(b) in a case where the work is divided into chapters exceed, in 
the aggregate, 10% of the number of pages in that edition but 
contain only the whole or part of a single chapter of the 
work.
(2A) Without limiting the meaning of the expression reasonable portion 
in this Act, if a person makes a reproduction of a part of:
(a) a published literary work (other than a computer program or 
an electronic compilation, such as a database); or
(b) a published dramatic work;
being a work that is in electronic form, the reproduction is taken to 
contain only a reasonable portion of the work if:
(c) the number of words copied does not exceed, in the 
aggregate, 10% of the number of words in the work; or
(d) if the work is divided into chapters—the number of words 
copied exceeds, in the aggregate, 10% of the number of 
words in the work, but the reproduction contains only the 
whole or part of a single chapter of the work.
(2B) If a published literary or dramatic work is contained in a published 
edition of the work and is separately available in electronic form, a 
reproduction of a part of the work is taken to contain only a 
reasonable portion of the work if it is taken to do so either under 
subsection (2) or (2A), whether or not it does so under both of 
them.
(2C) If:
(a) a person makes a reproduction of a part of a published 
literary or dramatic work; and
(b) the reproduction is taken to contain only a reasonable portion 
of the work under subsection (2) or (2A);
  
  
subsection (2) or (2A) does not apply in relation to any subsequent 
reproduction made by the person of any other part of the same 
work.
(3) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
(e) a reference to the Crown in right of a State shall be read as 
including a reference to the Crown in right of the Australian 
Capital Territory and the Northern Territory; and
(g) a reference to the making, by reprographic reproduction, of a 
copy of a document, or of the whole or a part of a work, shall 
be read as a reference to the making of a facsimile copy of 
the document or the whole or that part of the work, being a 
facsimile copy of any size or form; and
(j) a reference to a microform copy of the whole or a part of a 
work shall be read as a reference to a copy of the whole or a 
part of the work produced by miniaturizing the graphic 
symbols of which the work is composed; and
(k) a reference to a periodical publication shall be read as a 
reference to an issue of a periodical publication and a 
reference to articles contained in the same periodical 
publication shall be read as a reference to articles contained 
in the same issue of that periodical publication; and
(ma) a reference to a relevant declaration, in relation to the 
making, in reliance on section 49, of a copy of the whole or a 
part of a work, shall be read as a reference to:
(i) in a case where the copy is made in reliance on 
subsection 49(2)—a declaration of the kind referred to 
in subsection 49(1) that is furnished in relation to the 
making of the copy; or
(ii) in a case where the copy is made in reliance on 
subsection 49(2C)—a declaration of the kind referred to 
in paragraph 49(2C)(b) that is made in relation to the 
making of the copy; or
(iii) in any case—a declaration of the kind referred to in 
subsection 49(5) that is made in relation to the making 
of the copy; and
  
  
(n) a reference to a State shall be read as including a reference to 
the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory 
and a reference to a Territory shall be read as not including a 
reference to the Australian Capital Territory or the Northern 
Territory.
(3A) For the purposes of this Act, something held in, or forming part of, 
the collection of any archives covered by paragraph (aa) of the 
definition of archives in subsection (1) is taken not to be held in, 
and not to form part of, the collection of the National Archives of 
Australia.
Note: Paragraph (aa) of the definition of archives covers archival material in 
the custody of a person other than the National Archives of Australia 
under an arrangement referred to in section 64 of the Archives Act 
1983.
(4) Where:
(a) a collection of documents or other material of historical 
significance or public interest that is in the custody of a body, 
whether incorporated or unincorporated, is being maintained 
by the body for the purpose of conserving and preserving 
those documents or other material; and
(b) the body does not maintain and operate the collection for the 
purpose of deriving a profit;
paragraph (b) of the definition of archives in subsection (1) applies 
to that collection.
Example: Museums and galleries are examples of bodies that could have 
collections covered by paragraph (b) of the definition of archives.
(5) A reference to a copy of a cinematograph film includes a reference 
to any form (whether visible or not) of storage of a cinematograph 
film, or a substantial part of a cinematograph film, (whether or not 
the copy of the film, or a substantial part of the film, can be 
reproduced).
(6) A reference to a copy of a sound recording includes a reference to 
any form (whether visible or not) of storage of the sound recording, 
or a substantial part of the sound recording, (whether or not the 
  
  
copy of the recording, or a substantial part of the recording, can be 
reproduced).
10AA  Non-infringing copy of a sound recording
Minimum requirements
(1) A copy of a sound recording is a non-infringing copy only if it is 
made by or with the consent of:
(a) the owner of the copyright or related right in the sound 
recording in the country (the copy country) in which the copy 
was made; or
(b) the owner of the copyright or related right in the sound 
recording in the country (the original recording country) in 
which the sound recording was made, if the law of the copy 
country did not provide for copyright or a related right in 
sound recordings when the sound recording was made; or
(c) the maker of the sound recording, if neither the law of the 
copy country nor the law of the original recording country 
(whether those countries are different or not) provided for 
copyright or a related right in sound recordings when the 
sound recording was made.
Extra requirements for copies of recordings of works subject to 
Australian copyright
(2) If the sound recording is of a work that is a literary, dramatic or 
musical work in which copyright subsists in Australia, the copy is a 
non-infringing copy only if:
(a) copyright subsists in the work under the law of the copy 
country; and
(b) the making of the copy does not infringe the copyright in the 
work under the law of the copy country; and
(c) the copy country meets the requirements of subsection (3).
To avoid doubt, the requirements of this subsection are additional 
to those of subsection (1).
  
  
Requirements for copy country
(3) The copy country mentioned in subsection (2) must:
(a) be a party to the International Convention for the Protection 
of Literary and Artistic Works concluded at Berne on 
9 September 1886 as revised from time to time; or
(b) be a member of the World Trade Organization and have a 
law that provides consistently with the TRIPS Agreement 
for:
(i) the ownership and duration of copyright in literary, 
dramatic and musical works; and
(ii) the owner of the copyright in the work to have rights 
relating to the reproduction of the work.
Australian copyright may result from Act or regulations
(4) For the purposes of subsection (2) it does not matter whether the 
copyright in the work subsists in Australia as a result of this Act or 
as a result of the regulations made for the purposes of section 184.
10AB  Non-infringing copy of a computer program
A copy of a computer program is a non-infringing copy only if:
(a) it is made in a qualifying country; and
(b) its making did not constitute an infringement of any 
copyright in a work under a law of that country.
10AC  Non-infringing copy of an electronic literary or music item
A copy of an electronic literary or music item is a non-infringing 
copy only if:
(a) it is made in a qualifying country; and
(b) its making did not constitute an infringement of any 
copyright in a work, or in a published edition of a work, 
under a law of that country.
  
  
10AD  Accessories to imported articles
Accessories
(1) If a person imports into Australia:
(a) an article that has embodied in it a copy of a computer 
program; or
(b) an article that has embodied in it a copy of an electronic 
literary or music item; or
(c) an article that has embodied in it a copy of a sound recording;
a copy of any work or other subject matter (other than a feature 
film) that is on, embodied in, or included with, the article on its 
importation is taken to be an accessory to the article.
Note: See also sections 44C and 112C (about the non-infringement of 
copyright in works or other subject matter that are accessories to 
imported articles).
Definition
(2) In this section:
feature film means a cinematograph film that:
(a) is produced wholly or principally:
(i) for exhibition to the public in cinemas or by way of 
television broadcasting; or
(ii) for sale or rental to the public where it is reasonable to 
assume that the viewing of the film (without electronic 
interactive involvement with the film) would be the 
primary object of any such sale or rental; and
(b) is more than 20 minutes in duration.
Interpretation
(3) This section does not limit the meaning of accessory in 
subsection 10(1).
  
  
11  Residence in a country not affected by temporary absence
For the purposes of this Act, a person who, at a material time, was 
ordinarily resident in a country (including Australia) but was 
temporarily absent from that country shall be treated as if he or she 
had been resident in that country at that time.
12  References to Parliament
A reference in this Act to a Parliament shall be read as a reference 
to the Parliament of the Commonwealth or of a State or a 
legislature of a Territory.
13  Acts comprised in copyright
(1) A reference in this Act to an act comprised in the copyright in a 
work or other subject-matter shall be read as a reference to any act 
that, under this Act, the owner of the copyright has the exclusive 
right to do.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the exclusive right to do an act in 
relation to a work, an adaptation of a work or any other 
subject-matter includes the exclusive right to authorize a person to 
do that act in relation to that work, adaptation or other 
subject-matter.
14  Acts done in relation to substantial part of work or other 
subject-matter deemed to be done in relation to the whole
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
(a) a reference to the doing of an act in relation to a work or 
other subject-matter shall be read as including a reference to 
the doing of that act in relation to a substantial part of the 
work or other subject-matter; and
(b) a reference to a reproduction, adaptation or copy of a work 
shall be read as including a reference to a reproduction, 
adaptation or copy of a substantial part of the work, as the 
case may be.
  
  
(2) This section does not affect the interpretation of any reference in 
sections 32, 177, 187 and 198 to the publication, or absence of 
publication, of a work.
15  References to acts done with licence of owner of copyright
For the purposes of this Act, an act shall be deemed to have been 
done with the licence of the owner of a copyright if the doing of 
the act was authorized by a licence binding the owner of the 
copyright.
16  References to partial assignment of copyright
A reference in this Act to a partial assignment of copyright shall be 
read as a reference to an assignment of copyright that is limited in 
any way.
17  Statutory employment
For the purposes of this Act, the employment of a person, or the 
employment of a person as an apprentice, under a law of the 
Commonwealth or of a State but otherwise than under a contract of 
service or contract of apprenticeship shall be treated as if that 
employment were employment under a contract of service or 
employment under a contract of apprenticeship, as the case may be.
18  Libraries established or conducted for profit
For the purposes of this Act, a library shall not be taken to be 
established or conducted for profit by reason only that the library is 
owned by a person carrying on business for profit.
19  References to Copyright Act, 1911
A reference in a provision of this Act to the Copyright Act, 1911, 
in relation to any time before the commencement of this Act, shall, 
for the purposes of the application of that provision in relation to a 
  
  
State or a Territory, be read as a reference to the Copyright Act, 
1911 as it applied in that State or Territory at that time.
20  Names under which work is published
(1) A reference in this Act to the name or names under which a work 
was published shall be read as a reference to the name or names 
specified in the work as the name of the author or the names of the 
authors of the work.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a publication of a work under two or 
more names shall not be taken to be pseudonymous unless all those 
names are pseudonyms.
21  Reproduction and copying of works and other subject-matter
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a literary, dramatic or musical work 
shall be deemed to have been reproduced in a material form if a 
sound recording or cinematograph film is made of the work, and 
any record embodying such a recording and any copy of such a 
film shall be deemed to be a reproduction of the work.
(1A) For the purposes of this Act, a work is taken to have been 
reproduced if it is converted into or from a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, and any article embodying the 
work in such a form is taken to be a reproduction of the work.
Note: The reference to the conversion of a work into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form includes the first digitisation of the 
work.
(2) Subsections (1) and (1A) apply in relation to an adaptation of a 
work in the same way as they apply in relation to a work.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, an artistic work shall be deemed to 
have been reproduced:
(a) in the case of a work in a two-dimensional form—if a version 
of the work is produced in a three-dimensional form; or
  
  
(b) in the case of a work in a three-dimensional form—if a 
version of the work is produced in a two-dimensional form;
and the version of the work so produced shall be deemed to be a 
reproduction of the work.
(4) The last preceding subsection has effect subject to Division 7 of 
Part III.
(5) For the purposes of this Act, a computer program is taken to have 
been reproduced if:
(a) an object code version of the program is derived from the 
program in source code by any process, including 
compilation; or
(b) a source code version of the program is derived from the 
program in object code by any process, including 
decompilation;
and any such version is taken to be a reproduction of the program.
(6) For the purposes of this Act, a sound recording or cinematograph 
film is taken to have been copied if it is converted into or from a 
digital or other electronic machine-readable form, and any article 
embodying the recording or film in such a form is taken to be a 
copy of the recording or film.
Note: The reference to the conversion of a sound recording or 
cinematograph film into a digital or other electronic machine-readable 
form includes the first digitisation of the recording or film.
22  Provisions relating to the making of a work or other 
subject-matter
Literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works
(1) A reference in this Act to the time when, or the period during 
which, a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work was made shall 
be read as a reference to the time when, or the period during which, 
as the case may be, the work was first reduced to writing or to 
some other material form.
  
  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a literary, dramatic or musical work 
that exists in the form of sounds embodied in an article or thing 
shall be deemed to have been reduced to a material form and to 
have been so reduced at the time when those sounds were 
embodied in that article or thing.
Sound recordings
(3) For the purposes of this Act:
(a) a sound recording, other than a sound recording of a live 
performance, shall be deemed to have been made at the time 
when the first record embodying the recording was produced; 
and
(b) the maker of the sound recording is the person who owned 
that record at that time.
(3A) For the purposes of this Act, the makers of a sound recording of a 
live performance are:
(a) the person or persons who, at the time of the recording, own 
the record on which the recording is made; and
(b) the performer or performers who performed in the 
performance (other than a performer who is already covered 
by paragraph (a)).
Note: A performer might be liable to pay compensation under 
section 116AAA to a person who owns the record on which the 
recording is made.
(3B) If:
(a) a sound recording of a live performance is made; and
(b) a performer performs in that performance under the terms of 
his or her employment by another person (the employer) 
under a contract of service or apprenticeship;
then, for the purposes of paragraph (3A)(b), the employer is taken 
to be a maker instead of that performer.
(3C) Subsection (3B) may be excluded or modified by agreement 
between the performer and the employer.
  
  
Cinematograph films
(4) For the purposes of this Act:
(a) a reference to the making of a cinematograph film shall be 
read as a reference to the doing of the things necessary for 
the production of the first copy of the film; and
(b) the maker of the cinematograph film is the person by whom 
the arrangements necessary for the making of the film were 
undertaken.
Broadcasts and other communications
(5) For the purposes of this Act, a broadcast is taken to have been 
made by the person who provided the broadcasting service by 
which the broadcast was delivered.
(6) For the purposes of this Act, a communication other than a 
broadcast is taken to have been made by the person responsible for 
determining the content of the communication.
(6A) To avoid doubt, for the purposes of subsection (6), a person is not 
responsible for determining the content of a communication merely 
because the person takes one or more steps for the purpose of:
(a) gaining access to what is made available online by someone 
else in the communication; or
(b) receiving the electronic transmission of which the 
communication consists.
Example: A person is not responsible for determining the content of the 
communication to the person of a web page merely because the person 
clicks on a link to gain access to the page.
Definitions
(7) In this section:
live performance means:
(a) a performance (including an improvisation) of a dramatic 
work, or part of such a work, including such a performance 
given with the use of puppets; or
  
  
(b) a performance (including an improvisation) of a musical 
work or part of such a work; or
(c) the reading, recitation or delivery of a literary work, or part 
of such a work, or the recitation or delivery of an improvised 
literary work; or
(d) a performance of a dance; or
(e) a performance of a circus act or a variety act or any similar 
presentation or show; or
(f) a performance of an expression of folklore;
being a live performance, whether in the presence of an audience 
or otherwise.
performer in a live performance:
(a) means each person who contributed to the sounds of the 
performance; and
(b) if the performance includes a performance of a musical 
work—includes the conductor.
sound recording of a live performance means a sound recording, 
made at the time of the live performance, consisting of, or 
including, the sounds of the performance.
23  Sound recordings and records
(1) For the purposes of this Act, sounds embodied in a sound-track 
associated with visual images forming part of cinematograph film 
shall be deemed not to be a sound recording.
(2) A reference in this Act to a record of a work or other 
subject-matter shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be read 
as a reference to a record by means of which the work or other 
subject-matter can be performed.
24  References to sounds and visual images embodied in an article
For the purposes of this Act, sounds or visual images shall be taken 
to have been embodied in an article or thing if the article or thing 
has been so treated in relation to those sounds or visual images that 
  
  
those sounds or visual images are capable, with or without the aid 
of some other device, of being reproduced from the article or thing.
25  Provisions relating to broadcasting
(1) A reference in this Act to broadcasting shall, unless the contrary 
intention appears, be read as a reference to broadcasting whether 
by way of sound broadcasting or of television.
(2) A reference in this Act to the doing of an act by the reception of a 
television broadcast or sound broadcast shall be read as a reference 
to the doing of that act by means of receiving a broadcast:
(a) from the transmission by which the broadcast is made; or
(b) from a transmission made otherwise than by way of 
broadcasting, but simultaneously with the transmission 
referred to in the last preceding paragraph;
whether the reception of the broadcast is directly from the 
transmission concerned or from a re-transmission made by any 
person from any place.
(3) Where a record embodying a sound recording or a copy of a 
cinematograph film is used for the purpose of making a broadcast 
(in this subsection referred to as the primary broadcast), a person 
who makes a broadcast (in this subsection referred to as the 
secondary broadcast) by receiving and making a retransmission of:
(a) the transmission by which the primary broadcast was made; 
or
(b) a transmission made otherwise than by way of broadcasting 
but simultaneously with the transmission referred to in the 
last preceding paragraph;
shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed not to have used the 
record or copy for the purpose of making the secondary broadcast.
(4) In this Act:
(a) a reference to a cinematograph film of a television broadcast 
shall be read as including a reference to a cinematograph 
film, or a photograph, of any of the visual images comprised 
in the broadcast; and
  
  
(b) a reference to a copy of a cinematograph film of a television 
broadcast shall be read as including a reference to a copy of a 
cinematograph film, or a reproduction of a photograph, of 
any of those images.
27  Performance
(1) Subject to this section, a reference in this Act to performance shall:
(a) be read as including a reference to any mode of visual or 
aural presentation, whether the presentation is by the use of 
reception equipment, by the exhibition of a cinematograph 
film, by the use of a record or by any other means; and
(b) in relation to a lecture, address, speech or sermon—be read 
as including a reference to delivery;
and a reference in this Act to performing a work or an adaptation 
of a work has a corresponding meaning.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the communication of a work or other 
subject-matter to the public does not constitute:
(a) performance; or
(b) causing visual images to be seen or sounds to be heard.
(3) Where visual images or sounds are displayed or emitted by any 
reception equipment to which they are communicated, the 
operation of any equipment by which the images or sounds are 
communicated, directly or indirectly, to the reception equipment 
shall be deemed not to constitute performance or to constitute 
causing visual images to be seen or sounds to be heard but, in so 
far as the display or emission of the images or sounds constitutes a 
performance, or causes the images to be seen or the sounds to be 
heard, the performance, or the causing of the images to be seen or 
sounds to be heard, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be 
effected by the operation of the reception equipment.
  
  
(4) Without prejudice to the last two preceding subsections, where a 
work or an adaptation of a work is performed or visual images are 
caused to be seen or sounds to be heard by the operation of any 
equipment referred to in the last preceding subsection or of any 
equipment for reproducing sounds by the use of a record, being 
equipment provided by or with the consent of the occupier of the 
premises where the equipment is situated, the occupier of those 
premises shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be the 
person giving the performance or causing the images to be seen or 
the sounds to be heard, whether he or she is the person operating 
the equipment or not.
(5) This section does not apply to a performance within the meaning of 
Part XIA.
28  Performance and communication of works or other 
subject-matter in the course of educational instruction
(1) Where a literary, dramatic or musical work:
(a) is performed in class, or otherwise in the presence of an 
audience; and
(b) is so performed by a teacher in the course of giving 
educational instruction, not being instruction given for profit, 
or by a student in the course of receiving such instruction;
the performance shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed not 
to be a performance in public if the audience is limited to persons 
who are taking part in the instruction or are otherwise directly 
connected with the place where the instruction is given.
(2) For the purposes of this section, educational instruction given by a 
teacher at a place of education that is not conducted for profit shall 
not be taken to be given for profit by reason only that the teacher 
receives remuneration for giving the instruction.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be taken to be 
directly connected with a place where instruction is given by 
reason only that he or she is a parent or guardian of a student who 
receives instruction at that place.
  
  
(4) The last three preceding subsections apply in relation to sound 
recordings and cinematograph films in like manner as they apply in 
relation to literary, dramatic and musical works but, in the 
application of those subsections in relation to such recordings or 
films, any reference to performance shall be read as a reference to 
the act of causing the sounds concerned to be heard or the visual 
images concerned to be seen.
(5) A communication of a literary, dramatic or musical work, a sound 
recording or a cinematograph film is taken for the purposes of this 
Act not to be a communication to the public if the communication 
is made merely to facilitate:
(a) a performance of the work that, because of this section, is not 
a performance in public; or
(b) an act of causing sounds forming part of the recording to be 
heard that, because of this section, is not an act of causing the 
sound recording to be heard in public; or
(c) an act of causing visual images or sounds forming part of the 
cinematograph film to be seen or heard that, because of this 
section, is not an act of causing the film to be seen or heard 
in public.
(6) A communication of a television broadcast or sound broadcast is 
taken for the purposes of this Act not to be a communication of the 
broadcast, or of a work or other subject-matter included in the 
broadcast, to the public if:
(a) the communication is made merely to facilitate the television 
broadcast being seen and heard, or the sound broadcast being 
heard, in class or otherwise in the presence of an audience, in 
the course of educational instruction that:
(i) is given by a teacher; and
(ii) is not given for profit; and
(b) the audience is limited to persons who are taking part in the 
instruction or are otherwise directly connected with the place 
where the instruction is given.
(7) A communication of an artistic work is taken for the purposes of 
this Act not to be a communication of the work to the public if:
  
  
(a) the communication is made merely to facilitate the work 
being seen in class or otherwise in the presence of an 
audience, in the course of educational instruction that:
(i) is given by a teacher; and
(ii) is not given for profit; and
(b) the audience is limited to persons who are taking part in the 
instruction or are otherwise directly connected with the place 
where the instruction is given.
29  Publication
(1) Subject to this section, for the purposes of this Act:
(a) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or an edition of 
such a work, shall be deemed to have been published if, but 
only if, reproductions of the work or edition have been 
supplied (whether by sale or otherwise) to the public;
(b) a cinematograph film shall be deemed to have been published 
if, but only if, copies of the film have been sold, let on hire, 
or offered or exposed for sale or hire, to the public; and
(c) a sound recording shall be deemed to have been published if, 
but only if, records embodying the recording or a part of the 
recording have been supplied (whether by sale or otherwise) 
to the public.
(2) In determining, for the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), whether 
reproductions of a work or edition have been supplied to the 
public, section 14 does not apply.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the performance of a literary, 
dramatic or musical work, the supplying (whether by sale or 
otherwise) to the public of records of a literary, dramatic or 
musical work, the exhibition of an artistic work, the construction of 
a building or of a model of a building, or the supplying (whether by 
sale or otherwise) to the public of photographs or engravings of a 
building, of a model of a building or of a sculpture, does not 
constitute publication of the work.
  
  
(4) A publication that is merely colourable and is not intended to 
satisfy the reasonable requirements of the public shall be 
disregarded for the purposes of this Act except in so far as it may 
constitute an infringement of copyright or a breach of a duty under 
Part IX.
(5) For the purposes of this Act, a publication in Australia or in any 
other country shall not be treated as being other than the first 
publication by reason only of an earlier publication elsewhere, if 
the two publications took place within a period of not more than 
thirty days.
(6) In determining, for the purposes of any provision of this Act:
(a) whether a work or other subject-matter has been published;
(b) whether a publication of a work or other subject-matter was 
the first publication of the work or other subject-matter; or
(c) whether a work or other subject-matter was published or 
otherwise dealt with in the life-time of a person;
any unauthorized publication or the doing of any other 
unauthorized act shall be disregarded.
(7) Subject to section 52, a publication or other act shall, for the 
purposes of the last preceding subsection, be taken to have been 
unauthorized if, but only if:
(a) copyright subsisted in the work or other subject-matter and 
the act concerned was done otherwise than by, or with the 
licence of, the owner of the copyright; or
(b) copyright did not subsist in the work or other subject-matter 
and the act concerned was done otherwise than by, or with 
the licence of:
(i) the author or, in the case of a sound recording, 
cinematograph film or edition of a work, the maker or 
publisher, as the case may be; or
(ii) persons lawfully claiming under the author, maker or 
publisher.
(8) Nothing in either of the last two preceding subsections affects any 
provisions of this Act relating to the acts comprised in a copyright 
  
  
or to acts constituting infringements of copyrights or any 
provisions of Part IX.
29A  Making public
(1) Without limiting when a work is made public, it is made public 
when:
(a) the work, or an adaptation of the work, is:
(i) published, performed in public, broadcast or otherwise 
communicated to the public; or
(ii) if the work is an artistic work—exhibited in public; or
(b) if the work is an artistic work included in a cinematograph 
film—the film is seen in public; or
(c) if the work is a building—the building has been constructed; 
or
(d) records of the work, or of an adaptation of the work, are:
(i) offered to the public (whether or not for sale); or
(ii) exposed for sale to the public.
(2) Without limiting when copyright material other than a work is 
made public, the material is made public when:
(a) it is published; or
(b) if the material is a sound recording—it is:
(i) heard in public; or
(ii) communicated to the public; or
(c) if the material is a cinematograph film—it is:
(i) seen in public (to the extent it consists of visual 
images); or
(ii) heard in public (to the extent it consists of sounds); or
(iii) communicated to the public; or
(d) copies of the material are:
(i) offered to the public (whether or not for sale); or
(ii) exposed for sale to the public.
  
  
(3) Subsections 29(4) to (7) apply, for the purposes of this section, in 
relation to making public in the same way as those subsections 
apply in relation to publication.
30  Ownership of copyright for particular purposes
In the case of a copyright of which (whether as a result of a partial 
assignment or otherwise) different persons are the owners in 
respect of its application to:
(a) the doing of different acts or classes of acts; or
(b) the doing of one or more acts or classes of acts in different 
countries or at different times;
the owner of the copyright, for any purpose of this Act, shall be 
deemed to be the person who is the owner of the copyright in 
respect of its application to the doing of the particular act or class 
of acts, or to the doing of the particular act or class of acts in the 
particular country or at the particular time, as the case may be, that 
is relevant to that purpose, and a reference in this Act to the 
prospective owner of a future copyright of which different persons 
are the prospective owners has a corresponding meaning.
30A  Commercial rental arrangement
(1) In this Act, the expression commercial rental arrangement, in 
relation to a work reproduced in a sound recording, signifies an 
arrangement that has the following features:
(a) however the arrangement is expressed, it is in substance an 
arrangement under which a copy of the sound recording is 
made available by a person on terms that it will or may be 
returned to the person;
(b) the arrangement is made in the course of the conduct of a 
business;
(c) the arrangement provides for the copy to be made available:
(i) for payment in money or money’s worth; or
(ii) as part of the provision of a service for which payment 
in money or money’s worth is to be made.
  
  
(2) In this Act, the expression commercial rental arrangement, in 
relation to a sound recording or a computer program, signifies an 
arrangement that has the following features:
(a) however the arrangement is expressed, it is in substance an 
arrangement under which a copy of the sound recording or 
computer program is made available by a person on terms 
that it will or may be returned to the person;
(b) the arrangement is made in the course of the conduct of a 
business;
(c) the arrangement provides for the copy to be made available:
(i) for payment in money or money’s worth; or
(ii) as part of the provision of a service for which payment 
in money or money’s worth is to be made.
(3) It is not the intention of the Parliament that a lending arrangement 
should be regarded as a commercial rental arrangement for the 
purposes of subsection (1) or (2).
(4) An arrangement is to be regarded as a lending arrangement if, 
regardless of the way in which the arrangement is expressed, the 
true nature of the arrangement is that it is an arrangement for the 
lending of a copy of a sound recording or computer program under 
which no amount, other than a deposit to secure the return of the 
copy, is payable.
  
Division 1  Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works
Part III—Copyright in original literary, dramatic, 
musical and artistic works
Division 1—Nature, duration and ownership of copyright 
in works
31  Nature of copyright in original works
(1) For the purposes of this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, 
copyright, in relation to a work, is the exclusive right:
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, to do all 
or any of the following acts:
(i) to reproduce the work in a material form;
(ii) to publish the work;
(iii) to perform the work in public;
(iv) to communicate the work to the public;
(vi) to make an adaptation of the work;
(vii) to do, in relation to a work that is an adaptation of the 
first-mentioned work, any of the acts specified in 
relation to the first-mentioned work in subparagraphs (i) 
to (iv), inclusive; and
(b) in the case of an artistic work, to do all or any of the 
following acts:
(i) to reproduce the work in a material form;
(ii) to publish the work;
(iii) to communicate the work to the public; and
(c) in the case of a literary work (other than a computer program) 
or a musical or dramatic work, to enter into a commercial 
rental arrangement in respect of the work reproduced in a 
sound recording; and
(d) in the case of a computer program, to enter into a commercial 
rental arrangement in respect of the program.
  
Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works  Division 1
(2) The generality of subparagraph (1)(a)(i) is not affected by 
subparagraph (1)(a)(vi).
(3) Paragraph (1)(d) does not extend to entry into a commercial rental 
arrangement in respect of a machine or device in which a computer 
program is embodied if the program is not able to be copied in the 
course of the ordinary use of the machine or device.
(4) The reference in subsection (3) to a device does not include a 
device of a kind ordinarily used to store computer programs (for 
example, a floppy disc, a device of the kind commonly known as a 
CD ROM, or an integrated circuit).
(5) Paragraph (1)(d) does not extend to entry into a commercial rental 
arrangement if the computer program is not the essential object of 
the rental.
(6) Paragraph (1)(c) does not extend to entry into a commercial rental 
arrangement if:
(a) the copy of the sound recording concerned was purchased by 
a person (the record owner) before the commencement of 
Part 2 of the Copyright (World Trade Organization 
Amendments) Act 1994; and
(b) the commercial rental arrangement is entered into in the 
ordinary course of a business conducted by the record owner; 
and
(c) the record owner was conducting the same business, or 
another business that consisted of, or included, the making of 
commercial rental arrangements of the same kind, when the 
copy was purchased.
(7) Paragraph (1)(d) does not extend to entry into a commercial rental 
arrangement in respect of a computer program if:
(a) the copy of the computer program was purchased by a person 
(the program owner) before the commencement of Part 2 of 
the Copyright (World Trade Organization Amendments) Act 
1994; and
  
Division 1  Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works
(b) the commercial rental arrangement is entered into in the 
ordinary course of a business conducted by the program 
owner; and
(c) the program owner was conducting the same business, or 
another business that consisted of, or included, the making of 
commercial rental arrangements in respect of computer 
programs, when the copy was purchased.
32  Original works in which copyright subsists
(1) Subject to this Act, copyright subsists in an original literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic work that is unpublished and of which 
the author:
(a) was a qualified person at the time when the work was made; 
or
(b) if the making of the work extended over a period—was a 
qualified person for a substantial part of that period.
(2) Subject to this Act, where an original literary, dramatic, musical or 
artistic work has been published:
(a) copyright subsists in the work; or
(b) if copyright in the work subsisted immediately before its first 
publication—copyright continues to subsist in the work;
if, but only if:
(c) the first publication of the work took place in Australia;
(d) the author of the work was a qualified person at the time 
when the work was first published; or
(e) the author died before that time but was a qualified person 
immediately before his or her death.
(3) Notwithstanding the last preceding subsection but subject to the 
remaining provisions of this Act, copyright subsists in:
(a) an original artistic work that is a building situated in 
Australia; or
(b) an original artistic work that is attached to, or forms part of, 
such a building.
  
Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works  Division 1
(4) In this section, qualified person means an Australian citizen or a 
person resident in Australia.
33  Duration of copyright in original works
(1) This section applies to copyright that subsists in a work under this 
Part.
Works first made public before 1 January 2019
(2) The following table has effect if the work was first made public 
before 1 January 2019.
Duration of copyright—works first made public before 1 January 2019
Item Column 1
If …
Column 2
the copyright continues 
to subsist until …
1 no other item of this table applies 70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the author of the work 
died.
2 (a) the work is:
(i) a literary work (other than a 
computer program); or
(ii) a dramatic work; or
(iii) a musical work; or
(iv) an engraving; and
(b) the author of the work has died; and
(c) the work was not first made public before 
the author died; and
(d) item 3 does not apply
70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the work was first made 
public.
3 the identity of the author of the work is not 
generally known at any time before the end of 
70 years after the calendar year in which the 
work was first made public
70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the work was first made 
public.
  
Division 1  Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works
Works never made public, and works first made public on or after 
1 January 2019
(3) The following table has effect if the work was not first made public 
before 1 January 2019.
Duration of copyright—works not first made public before 1 January 2019
Item Column 1
If …
Column 2
the copyright continues 
to subsist until …
1 no other item of this table applies 70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the author of the work 
died.
2 (a) the identity of the author is not generally 
known at any time before the end of 70 
years after the calendar year in which the 
work was made; and
(b) the work is not first made public before the 
end of 50 years after the calendar year in 
which the work was made
70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the work was made.
3 (a) the identity of the author is not generally 
known at any time before the end of 70 
years after the calendar year in which the 
work was first made public; and
(b) the work is first made public before the 
end of 50 years after the calendar year in 
which the work was made
70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the work was first made 
public.
35  Ownership of copyright in original works
(1) This section has effect subject to Parts VII and X.
(2) Subject to this section, the author of a literary, dramatic, musical or 
artistic work is the owner of any copyright subsisting in the work 
by virtue of this Part.
  
Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works  Division 1
(3) The operation of any of the next three succeeding subsections in 
relation to copyright in a particular work may be excluded or 
modified by agreement.
(4) If a literary, dramatic or artistic work:
(a) is made by the author under the terms of his or her 
employment by the proprietor of a newspaper, magazine or 
similar periodical under a contract of service or 
apprenticeship; and
(b) is so made for the purpose of inclusion in a newspaper, 
magazine or similar periodical;
the following paragraphs apply:
(c) the author is the owner of the copyright only in so far as the 
copyright relates to:
(i) reproduction of the work for the purpose of inclusion in 
a book; or
(ii) reproduction of the work in the form of a hard copy 
facsimile (other than a hard copy facsimile made as part 
of a process of transmission) made from a paper edition 
of, or from another hard copy facsimile made from a 
paper edition of, an issue of the newspaper, magazine or 
similar periodical, but not including reproduction by the 
proprietor for a purpose connected with the publication 
of the newspaper, magazine or similar periodical;
(d) except as provided by paragraph (c), the proprietor is the 
owner of the copyright.
(5) Subject to the last preceding subsection, where:
(a) a person makes, for valuable consideration, an agreement 
with another person for the taking of a photograph for a 
private or domestic purpose, the painting or drawing of a 
portrait or the making of an engraving by the other person; 
and
(b) the work is made in pursuance of the agreement;
the first-mentioned person is the owner of any copyright subsisting 
in the work by virtue of this Part, but, if at the time the agreement 
was made that person made known, expressly or by implication, to 
  
Division 1  Nature, duration and ownership of copyright in works
the author of the work the purpose for which the work was 
required, the author is entitled to restrain the doing, otherwise than 
for that purpose, of any act comprised in the copyright in the work.
(6) Where a literary, dramatic or artistic work to which neither of the 
last two preceding subsections applies, or a musical work, is made 
by the author in pursuance of the terms of his or her employment 
by another person under a contract of service or apprenticeship, 
that other person is the owner of any copyright subsisting in the 
work by virtue of this Part.
(7) In this section:
hard copy facsimile, in relation to a literary, dramatic or artistic 
work, means a facsimile which is in a material form and from 
which the work is visible to a human being without the use of any 
device.
private or domestic purpose includes a portrait of family members, 
a wedding party or children.
  
Infringement of copyright in works  Division 2
Division 2—Infringement of copyright in works
36  Infringement by doing acts comprised in the copyright
(1) Subject to this Act, the copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical or 
artistic work is infringed by a person who, not being the owner of 
the copyright, and without the licence of the owner of the 
copyright, does in Australia, or authorizes the doing in Australia 
of, any act comprised in the copyright.
(1A) In determining, for the purposes of subsection (1), whether or not a 
person has authorised the doing in Australia of any act comprised 
in the copyright in a work, without the licence of the owner of the 
copyright, the matters that must be taken into account include the 
following:
(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing 
of the act concerned;
(b) the nature of any relationship existing between the person 
and the person who did the act concerned;
(c) whether the person took any reasonable steps to prevent or 
avoid the doing of the act, including whether the person 
complied with any relevant industry codes of practice.
(2) The next three succeeding sections do not affect the generality of 
this section.
37  Infringement by importation for sale or hire 
(1) Subject to Division 3, the copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical 
or artistic work is infringed by a person who, without the licence of 
the owner of the copyright, imports an article into Australia for the 
purpose of:
(a) selling, letting for hire, or by way of trade offering or 
exposing for sale or hire, the article;
(b) distributing the article:
(i) for the purpose of trade; or
  
Division 2  Infringement of copyright in works
(ii) for any other purpose to an extent that will affect 
prejudicially the owner of the copyright; or
(c) by way of trade exhibiting the article in public;
if the importer knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
making of the article would, if the article had been made in 
Australia by the importer, have constituted an infringement of the 
copyright.
(2) In relation to an accessory to an article that is or includes a copy of 
a work, being a copy that was made without the licence of the 
owner of the copyright in the work in the country in which the 
copy was made, subsection (1) has effect as if the words “the 
importer knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that” were 
omitted.
38  Infringement by sale and other dealings
(1) Subject to Division 3, the copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical 
or artistic work is infringed by a person who, in Australia, and 
without the licence of the owner of the copyright:
(a) sells, lets for hire, or by way of trade offers or exposes for 
sale or hire, an article; or
(b) by way of trade exhibits an article in public;
if the person knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
making of the article constituted an infringement of the copyright 
or, in the case of an imported article, would, if the article had been 
made in Australia by the importer, have constituted such an 
infringement.
(2) For the purposes of the last preceding subsection, the distribution 
of any articles:
(a) for the purpose of trade; or
(b) for any other purpose to an extent that affects prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright concerned;
shall be taken to be the sale of those articles.
(3) In this section:
  
Infringement of copyright in works  Division 2
article includes a reproduction or copy of a work or other 
subject-matter, being a reproduction or copy in electronic form.
39  Infringement by permitting place of public entertainment to be 
used for performance of work
(1) The copyright in a literary, dramatic or musical work is infringed 
by a person who permits a place of public entertainment to be used 
for the performance in public of the work, where the performance 
constitutes an infringement of the copyright in the work.
(2) This section does not apply where the person permitting the place 
to be so used establishes:
(a) that he or she was not aware, and had no reasonable grounds 
for suspecting, that the performance would be an 
infringement of the copyright; or
(b) that he or she gave the permission gratuitously, or for a 
consideration that was only nominal or, if more than 
nominal, did not exceed a reasonable estimate of the 
expenses to be incurred by him or her by reason of the use of 
the place for the performance.
(3) In this section, place of public entertainment includes any 
premises that are occupied principally for purposes other than 
public entertainment but are from time to time made available for 
hire for purposes of public entertainment.
39A  Infringing copies made on machines installed in libraries and 
archives
Where:
(a) a person makes an infringing copy of, or of part of, a work on 
a machine (including a computer), being a machine installed 
by or with the approval of the body administering a library or 
archives on the premises of the library or archives, or outside 
those premises for the convenience of persons using the 
library or archives; and
  
Division 2  Infringement of copyright in works
(b) there is affixed to, or in close proximity to, the machine, in a 
place readily visible to persons using the machine, a notice of 
the prescribed dimensions and in accordance with the 
prescribed form;
neither the body administering the library or archives nor the 
officer in charge of the library or archives shall be taken to have 
authorized the making of the infringing copy by reason only that 
the copy was made on that machine.
39B  Communication by use of certain facilities
A person (including a carrier or carriage service provider) who 
provides facilities for making, or facilitating the making of, a 
communication is not taken to have authorised any infringement of 
copyright in a work merely because another person uses the 
facilities so provided to do something the right to do which is 
included in the copyright.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
Division 3—Acts not constituting infringements of 
copyright in works
40  Fair dealing for purpose of research or study
(1) A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or 
with an adaptation of a literary, dramatic or musical work, for the 
purpose of research or study does not constitute an infringement of 
the copyright in the work.
(1A) A fair dealing with a literary work (other than lecture notes) does 
not constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if it is 
for the purpose of, or associated with, an approved course of study 
or research by an enrolled external student of an educational 
institution.
(1B) In subsection (1A) the expression lecture notes means any literary 
work produced for the purpose of the course of study or research 
by a person lecturing or teaching in or in connection with the 
course of study or research.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the matters to which regard shall be 
had, in determining whether a dealing with a literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work or with an adaptation of a literary, 
dramatic or musical work, being a dealing by way of reproducing 
the whole or a part of the work or adaptation, constitutes a fair 
dealing with the work or adaptation for the purpose of research or 
study include:
(a) the purpose and character of the dealing;
(b) the nature of the work or adaptation;
(c) the possibility of obtaining the work or adaptation within a 
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price;
(d) the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or 
value of, the work or adaptation; and
(e) in a case where part only of the work or adaptation is 
reproduced—the amount and substantiality of the part copied 
taken in relation to the whole work or adaptation.
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
(3) Despite subsection (2), a reproduction, for the purpose of research 
or study, of all or part of a literary, dramatic or musical work, or of 
an adaptation of such a work, contained in an article in a periodical 
publication is taken to be a fair dealing with the work or adaptation 
for the purpose of research or study.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply if another article in the publication is 
also reproduced for the purpose of different research or a different 
course of study.
(5) Despite subsection (2), a reproduction, for the purpose of research 
or study, of not more than a reasonable portion of a work or 
adaptation that is described in an item of the table and is not 
contained in an article in a periodical publication is taken to be a 
fair dealing with the work or adaptation for the purpose of research 
or study. For this purpose, reasonable portion means the amount 
described in the item.
Works, adaptations and reasonable portions
Item Work or adaptation Amount that is reasonable portion
1 A literary, dramatic or musical work 
(except a computer program), or an 
adaptation of such a work, that is 
contained in a published edition of at 
least 10 pages
(a) 10% of the number of pages in 
the edition; or
(b) if the work or adaptation is 
divided into chapters—a single 
chapter
2 A published literary work in 
electronic form (except a computer 
program or an electronic compilation, 
such as a database), a published 
dramatic work in electronic form or 
an adaptation published in electronic 
form of such a literary or dramatic 
work
(a) 10% of the number of words in 
the work or adaptation; or
(b) if the work or adaptation is 
divided into chapters—a single 
chapter
(6) Subsection (5) applies to a reproduction of a work or adaptation 
described in both items of the table in that subsection even if the 
amount of the work or adaptation reproduced is not more than a 
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
reasonable portion (as defined in that subsection) on the basis of 
only one of those items.
(7) If:
(a) a person makes a reproduction of a part of a published 
literary or dramatic work or published adaptation of a literary 
or dramatic work; and
(b) the reproduction is of not more than a reasonable portion (as 
defined in subsection (5)) of the work or adaptation;
subsection (5) does not apply in relation to any subsequent 
reproduction made by the person of any other part of the same 
work or adaptation.
(8) Subsections 10(2), (2A), (2B) and (2C) do not affect 
subsection (5), (6) or (7) of this section.
41  Fair dealing for purpose of criticism or review
A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or 
with an adaptation of a literary, dramatic or musical work, does not 
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if it is for 
the purpose of criticism or review, whether of that work or of 
another work, and a sufficient acknowledgement of the work is 
made.
41A  Fair dealing for purpose of parody or satire
A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or 
with an adaptation of a literary, dramatic or musical work, does not 
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if it is for 
the purpose of parody or satire.
42  Fair dealing for purpose of reporting news
(1) A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or 
with an adaptation of a literary, dramatic or musical work, does not 
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if:
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
(a) it is for the purpose of, or is associated with, the reporting of 
news in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical and a 
sufficient acknowledgement of the work is made; or
(b) it is for the purpose of, or is associated with, the reporting of 
news by means of a communication or in a cinematograph 
film.
(2) The playing of a musical work in the course of reporting news by 
means of a communication or in a cinematograph film is not a fair 
dealing with the work for the purposes of this section if the playing 
of the work does not form part of the news being reported.
43  Reproduction for purpose of judicial proceedings or professional 
advice 
(1) The copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is not 
infringed by anything done for the purposes of a judicial 
proceeding or of a report of a judicial proceeding.
(2) A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work 
does not constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if 
it is for the purpose of the giving of professional advice by:
(a) a legal practitioner; or
(b) a person registered as a patent attorney under the Patents Act 
1990; or
(c) a person registered as a trade marks attorney under the Trade 
Marks Act 1995.
43A  Temporary reproductions made in the course of 
communication
(1) The copyright in a work, or an adaptation of a work, is not 
infringed by making a temporary reproduction of the work or 
adaptation as part of the technical process of making or receiving a 
communication.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to the making of a 
temporary reproduction of a work, or an adaptation of a work, as 
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
part of the technical process of making a communication if the 
making of the communication is an infringement of copyright.
43B  Temporary reproductions of works as part of a technical 
process of use
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the copyright in a work is not infringed 
by the making of a temporary reproduction of the work if the 
reproduction is incidentally made as a necessary part of a technical 
process of using a copy of the work.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to:
(a) the making of a temporary reproduction of a work if the 
reproduction is made from:
(i) an infringing copy of the work; or
(ii) a copy of the work where the copy is made in another 
country and would be an infringing copy of the work if 
the person who made the copy had done so in Australia; 
or
(b) the making of a temporary reproduction of a work as a 
necessary part of a technical process of using a copy of the 
work if that use constitutes an infringement of the copyright 
in the work.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to any subsequent use of a temporary 
reproduction of a work other than as a part of the technical process 
in which the temporary reproduction was made.
43C  Reproducing works in books, newspapers and periodical 
publications in different form for private use
(1) This section applies if:
(a) the owner of a book, newspaper or periodical publication 
makes from it a reproduction (the main copy) of a work 
contained in the book, newspaper or periodical publication; 
and
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
(b) the main copy is made for his or her private and domestic use 
instead of the work as contained in the book, newspaper or 
periodical publication; and
(c) the main copy embodies the work in a form different from 
the form in which the work is embodied in the book, 
newspaper or periodical publication; and
(d) the book, newspaper or periodical publication itself is not an 
infringing copy of either the work or a published edition of 
the work; and
(e) at the time the owner makes the main copy, he or she has not 
made, and is not making, another copy that embodies the 
work in a form substantially identical to the form of the main 
copy.
For this purpose, disregard a temporary reproduction of the work 
incidentally made as a necessary part of the technical process of 
making the main copy.
(2) The making of the main copy is not an infringement of copyright in 
the work or a published edition of the work.
Dealing with main copy may make it an infringing copy
(3) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the main copy is:
(a) sold; or
(b) let for hire; or
(c) by way of trade offered or exposed for sale or hire; or
(d) distributed for the purpose of trade or otherwise.
Note: If the main copy is dealt with as described in subsection (3), then 
copyright may be infringed not only by the making of the main copy 
but also by the dealing with the main copy.
(4) To avoid doubt, paragraph (3)(d) does not apply to a loan of the 
main copy by the lender to a member of the lender’s family or 
household for the member’s private and domestic use.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
Reproducing work from main copy may infringe copyright
(5) Subsection (2) does not prevent the main copy from being an 
infringing copy for the purpose of working out whether this section 
applies again in relation to the making of another reproduction of 
the work from the main copy.
Disposal of book etc. may make the main copy an infringing copy
(6) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the owner of the 
book, newspaper or periodical publication disposes of it (in the 
form from which the main copy was made) to another person.
Status of temporary reproduction
(7) If subsection (2) applies to the making of the main copy only as a 
result of disregarding the incidental making of a temporary 
reproduction of the work as a necessary part of the technical 
process of making the main copy, then:
(a) if the temporary reproduction is destroyed at the first 
practicable time during or after the making of the main 
copy—the making of the temporary reproduction does not 
infringe copyright in the work or a published edition of the 
work; or
(b) if the temporary reproduction is not destroyed at that time—
the making of the temporary reproduction is taken always to 
have infringed copyright (if any) subsisting in the work and 
the published edition of the work from which the main copy 
was made.
44  Inclusion of works in collections for use by places of education
(1) The copyright in a published literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work is not infringed by the inclusion of a short extract from the 
work, or, in the case of a published literary, dramatic or musical 
work, from an adaptation of the work, in a collection of literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic works contained in a book, sound 
recording or cinematograph film and intended for use by places of 
education if:
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
(a) the collection is described in an appropriate place in the 
book, on the label of each record embodying the recording or 
of its container, or in the film, as being intended for use by 
places of education;
(b) the work or adaptation was not published for the purpose of 
being used by places of education;
(c) the collection consists principally of matter in which 
copyright does not subsist; and
(d) a sufficient acknowledgement of the work or adaptation is 
made.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to the 
copyright in a work if, in addition to the extract concerned, 2 or 
more other extracts from, or from adaptations of, works (being 
works in which copyright subsists at the time when the collection 
is published) by the author of the first-mentioned work are 
contained in that collection, or are contained in that collection 
taken together with every similar collection, if any, of works 
intended for use by places of education and published by the same 
publisher within the period of 5 years immediately preceding the 
publication of the first-mentioned collection.
44A  Importation etc. of books
(1) The copyright in an overseas work first published on or after the 
commencing day is not infringed by a person who, without the 
licence of the owner of the copyright, imports a non-infringing 
book into Australia for a purpose mentioned in paragraph 37(1)(a), 
(b) or (c).
(2) Subject to this section, the copyright in:
(a) an overseas work first published before the commencing day; 
or
(b) a work first published in Australia, whether before, on or 
after the commencing day;
is not infringed by a person who, without the licence of the owner 
of the copyright, imports a copy (in this subsection called the 
imported copy) of a hardback or paperback version of a 
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
non-infringing book into Australia for a purpose mentioned in 
paragraph 37(1)(a), (b) or (c) if:
(c) the person had ordered in writing from the copyright owner, 
or the owner’s licensee or agent, one or more copies of that 
version of the book (not being second-hand copies or more 
copies than were needed to satisfy the person’s reasonable 
requirements); and
(d) when the person ordered the imported copy, the original 
order mentioned in paragraph (c) had not been withdrawn or 
cancelled by, or with the consent of, the person and:
(i) at least 7 days had elapsed since the person placed the 
original order and the copyright owner, licensee or 
agent had not notified the person in writing that the 
original order would be filled within 90 days after it was 
placed; or
(ii) at least 90 days had elapsed since the person placed the 
original order and the copyright owner, licensee or 
agent had not filled the order.
(3) The copyright in a published work (whether first published before, 
on or after the commencing day) is not infringed by a person who, 
without the licence of the owner of the copyright, imports a single 
copy of a non-infringing book into Australia if the importation is 
for the purpose of filling a written order, or a verifiable telephone 
order, by a customer of the person and:
(a) in the case of a written order, the order contains a statement, 
signed by the customer; or
(b) in the case of a telephone order, the customer makes a 
verifiable statement;
to the effect that the customer does not intend to use the book for a 
purpose mentioned in paragraph 37(1)(a), (b) or (c).
(4) The copyright in a published work (whether first published before, 
on or after the commencing day) is not infringed by a person who, 
without the licence of the owner of the copyright, imports 2 or 
more copies of a non-infringing book into Australia if:
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
(a) the importation is for the purpose of filling a written order, or 
a verifiable telephone order, placed with the person by or on 
behalf of a library, other than a library conducted for the 
profit (direct or indirect) of a person or organisation; and
(b) in the case of a written order—the order contains a statement, 
signed by the person placing the order, to the effect that the 
library does not intend to use any of the books for a purpose 
mentioned in paragraph 37(1)(a), (b) or (c); and
(c) in the case of a telephone order—the person placing the order 
makes a verifiable statement to the effect referred to in 
paragraph (b); and
(d) the number of copies so imported is not more than the 
number of copies so ordered.
(5) Without limiting the ways in which a telephone order under 
subsection (3) or (4), or a statement under paragraph (3)(b) or 
(4)(c) relating to such an order, may be verified, such an order or 
statement is, for the purposes of this section, taken to be verifiable 
if the person who takes the order, or to whom the statement is 
made, makes a written note of the details of the order or statement 
when, or immediately after, the order is placed, or the statement is 
made, as the case may be.
(6) Where:
(a) a book is imported into Australia for a purpose mentioned in 
paragraph 37(1)(a), (b) or (c); and
(b) the importation does not, under this section, constitute an 
infringement of copyright in a published work;
the use of the book for any such purpose does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the work and subsection 38(1) 
does not apply to the book.
(7) Subsection (2) does not apply to the importation of a copy of a 
hardback version of a non-infringing book into Australia if the 
copyright owner, or his or her licensee or agent, is able to supply in 
Australia enough copies of a paperback version of the book to fill 
any reasonable order.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
(8) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(d), a copyright owner, licensee 
or agent is not taken to have filled an order by a person for one or 
more copies of a version of a book unless and until the copyright 
owner, licensee or agent sends the copy, or all of the copies, as the 
case requires, to the person.
(9) In this section:
book does not include:
(a) a book whose main content is one or more musical works, 
with or without any related literary, dramatic or artistic work; 
or
(b) a manual sold with computer software for use in connection 
with that software; or
(c) a periodical publication.
commencing day means the day on which the Copyright 
Amendment Act 1991 commences.
overseas work means a work:
(a) that was first published in a country other than Australia; and
(b) that was not published in Australia within 30 days after its 
first publication in that other country.
Note: A work may, for the purposes of this Act, be first published in 
Australia if it is published in Australia within 30 days of an earlier 
publication elsewhere. For the meaning of first publication, see 
section 29 and, in particular, subsection 29(5).
44B  Reproduction of writing on approved label for containers for 
chemical product
The reproduction on a label on a container for a chemical product 
of any writing appearing on an approved label is not an 
infringement of any copyright subsisting under this Part in relation 
to that writing.
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
44BA  Acts done in relation to certain medicine
(1) The following acts are not an infringement of any copyright 
subsisting under this Part in a work that is product information 
approved under section 25AA of the Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 
in relation to medicine:
(a) an act that is done under that Act and that is in respect of 
product information in relation to:
(i) restricted medicine; or
(ii) medicine in respect of which the applicant for the 
registration of that medicine under that Act has been 
given a notice of the kind referred to in 
subparagraph 25(1)(da)(ii) of that Act; or
(iii) medicine in respect of which subsection 25AA(2) or (3) 
of that Act applies;
(b) an act that is ancillary or incidental to an act referred to in 
paragraph (a).
(2) The following acts are not an infringement of any copyright 
subsisting under this Part in a work that is product information 
approved under section 25AA of the Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 
in relation to medicine:
(a) supplying, in Australia, some or all of any product 
information that is approved under that section in relation to 
medicine;
(b) reproducing, in Australia, some or all of the information 
referred to in paragraph (a);
(c) publishing, in Australia, some or all of the information 
referred to in paragraph (a);
(d) communicating, in Australia, some or all of the information 
referred to in paragraph (a);
(e) adapting, in Australia, some or all of the information referred 
to in paragraph (a);
to the extent that the supply, reproduction, publication, 
communication or adaptation is for a purpose related to the safe 
and effective use of the medicine referred to in paragraph (a).
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
(3) An act done in Australia that is ancillary or incidental to a supply, 
reproduction, publication, communication or adaptation referred to 
in subsection (2) is not an infringement of any copyright subsisting 
under this Part in the work referred to in subsection (2).
(4) For the purposes of this section, medicine, product information 
and restricted medicine have the same meanings as in the 
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989.
44BB  Copyright subsisting in works shared for healthcare or related 
purposes
(1) The copyright in a work is not infringed by an act comprised in the 
copyright in the work if:
(a) the act is done, or authorised to be done:
(i) for a purpose for which the collection, use or disclosure 
of health information is required or authorised under the 
My Health Records Act 2012; or
(ii) in circumstances in which a permitted general situation 
exists under item 1 of the table in subsection 16A(1) of 
the Privacy Act 1988 (serious threat to life, health or 
safety), or would exist if the act were done, or 
authorised to be done, by an entity that is an APP entity 
for the purposes of that Act; or
(iii) in circumstances in which a permitted health situation 
exists under section 16B of the Privacy Act 1988, or 
would exist if the act were done, or authorised to be 
done, by an entity that is an organisation for the 
purposes of that Act; or
(iv) for any other purpose relating to healthcare, or the 
communication or management of health information, 
prescribed by the regulations; and
(b) either:
(i) the work is substantially comprised of health 
information; or
(ii) the work allows for the storage, retrieval or use of 
health information and it is reasonably necessary to do 
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
the act, or authorise it to be done, in circumstances that 
would otherwise infringe copyright in the work.
(2) In this section:
healthcare has the same meaning as in the My Health Records Act 
2012.
health information has the same meaning as in the My Health 
Records Act 2012.
44C  Copyright subsisting in accessories etc. to imported articles
(1) The copyright in a work a copy of which is, or is on, or embodied 
in, a non-infringing accessory to an article is not infringed by 
importing the accessory with the article.
Note: See the definition of accessory in subsection 10(1) and see also 
section 10AD for an expanded meaning of accessory in relation to 
certain imported articles.
(2) Section 38 does not apply to a copy of a work, being a copy that is, 
or is on, or embodied in, a non-infringing accessory to an article, if 
the importation of the accessory is not an infringement of copyright 
in the work.
44D  Import of non-infringing copy of sound recording does not 
infringe copyright in works recorded
(1) The copyright in a literary, dramatic or musical work is not 
infringed by a person who:
(a) imports into Australia a non-infringing copy of a sound 
recording of the work; or
(b) does an act described in section 38 involving an article that is 
a non-infringing copy of a sound recording of the work and 
has been imported into Australia by anyone.
Note: In a civil action for infringement of copyright, a copy of a sound 
recording is presumed not to be a non-infringing copy of the sound 
recording unless the defendant proves it is. See section 130A.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works  Division 3
(2) This section applies to a copy of a sound recording only if, when 
the copy is imported into Australia, the sound recording has been 
published:
(a) in Australia; or
(b) in another country (the publication country) by or with the 
consent of:
(i) the owner of the copyright or related right in the sound 
recording in the publication country; or
(ii) the owner of the copyright or related right in the sound 
recording in the country (the original recording 
country) in which the sound recording was made, if the 
law of the publication country did not provide for 
copyright or a related right in sound recordings when 
publication occurred; or
(iii) the maker of the sound recording, if neither the law of 
the publication country nor the law of the original 
recording country (whether those countries are different 
or not) provided for copyright or a related right in sound 
recordings when publication occurred.
Note: Subsection 29(6) deals with unauthorised publication.
(3) In subsection (2):
owner of the copyright or related right in the sound recording 
means the owner at the time publication of the sound recording 
occurred.
(4) The definition of article in section 38 does not affect this section.
44E  Importation and sale etc. of copies of computer programs
(1) The copyright in a literary work:
(a) that is a computer program; and
(b) that has been published in Australia or a qualifying country;
is not infringed by a person who:
(c) imports into Australia an article that has embodied in it a 
non-infringing copy of the program; or
  
Division 3  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in works
(d) does an act mentioned in section 38 involving an article that 
has embodied in it a non-infringing copy of the program and 
that has been imported into Australia by anyone.
Note: Section 130B deals with the burden of proof a defendant bears in a 
civil action for infringement of copyright.
(2) The definition of article in section 38 does not affect this section.
44F  Importation and sale etc. of copies of electronic literary or 
music items
(1) The copyright in a work:
(a) that is, or is part of, an electronic literary or music item; and
(b) that has been published in Australia or a qualifying country;
is not infringed by a person who:
(c) imports into Australia an article that has embodied in it a 
non-infringing copy of the electronic literary or music item; 
or
(d) does an act mentioned in section 38 involving an article that 
has embodied in it a non-infringing copy of the electronic 
literary or music item and that has been imported into 
Australia by anyone.
Note: Section 130C deals with the burden of proof a defendant bears in a 
civil action for infringement of copyright.
(2) The definition of article in section 38 does not affect this section.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in literary, dramatic and musical works  
Division 4
Division 4—Acts not constituting infringements of 
copyright in literary, dramatic and musical 
works
45  Reading or recitation in public or for a broadcast
The reading or recitation in public, or the inclusion in a sound 
broadcast or television broadcast of a reading or recitation, of an 
extract of reasonable length from a published literary or dramatic 
work, or from an adaptation of such a work, does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the work if a sufficient 
acknowledgement of the work is made.
46  Performance at premises where persons reside or sleep
Where a literary, dramatic or musical work, or an adaptation of 
such a work, is performed in public, by the operation of reception 
equipment or by the use of a record, at premises where persons 
reside or sleep, as part of the amenities provided exclusively for 
residents or inmates of the premises or for those residents or 
inmates and their guests, the performance does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the work.
47  Reproduction for purpose of broadcasting
(1) Where the broadcasting by a person of a literary, dramatic or 
musical work, or of an adaptation of such a work, would not 
(whether by reason of an assignment or licence or of the operation 
of a provision of this Act) constitute an infringement of the 
copyright in the work, but the making by the person of a sound 
recording or a cinematograph film of the work or adaptation 
would, apart from this subsection, constitute such an infringement, 
the copyright in the work is not infringed by the making by the 
person of such a recording or film solely for the purpose of the 
broadcasting of the work or adaptation.
  
Division 4  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in literary, dramatic and 
musical works
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to a 
recording or film if a record embodying the recording or a copy of 
the film is used for a purpose other than:
(a) the broadcasting of the work or adaptation in circumstances 
that do not (whether by reason of an assignment or licence or 
of the operation of a provision of this Act) constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the work; or
(b) the making of further records embodying the recording or 
further copies of the film for the purpose of the broadcasting 
of the work or adaptation in such circumstances.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a recording or film 
where a record embodying the recording or a copy of the film is 
used for the purpose of the broadcasting of the work or adaptation 
by a person who is not the maker of the recording or film unless 
the maker has paid to the owner of the copyright in the work such 
amount as they agree or, in default of agreement, has given an 
undertaking in writing to the owner to pay to the owner such 
amount as is determined by the Copyright Tribunal, on the 
application of either of them, to be equitable remuneration to the 
owner for the making of the recording or film.
(4) A person who has given an undertaking referred to in the last 
preceding subsection is liable, when the Copyright Tribunal has 
determined the amount to which the undertaking relates, to pay that 
amount to the owner of the copyright in the work and the owner 
may recover that amount in a court of competent jurisdiction from 
the person as a debt due to the owner.
(5) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply in relation to a 
recording or film unless, before the expiration of the period of 12 
months commencing on the day on which any of the records 
embodying the recording or any of the copies of the film is first 
used for broadcasting the work or adaptation in accordance with 
that subsection, or before the expiration of such further period, if 
any, as is agreed between the maker of the recording or film and 
the owner of the copyright in the work, all the records embodying 
the recording or all the copies of the film are destroyed or are 
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in literary, dramatic and musical works  
Division 4
transferred, with the consent of the Director-General of the 
National Archives of Australia, to the care (within the meaning of 
the Archives Act 1983) of the National Archives of Australia.
(6) The Director-General of the National Archives of Australia must 
not consent to the transfer to the care of the National Archives of 
Australia in accordance with subsection (5) of a record embodying 
a recording or of a copy of a film unless he or she has certified that 
the recording or film is of an exceptional documentary character.
(7) In this section:
broadcasting does not include simulcasting.
47AA  Reproduction for the purpose of simulcasting
(1) If the broadcasting of a literary, dramatic or musical work, or of an 
adaptation of such a work, would not for any reason constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the work, but the making of a 
sound recording or a cinematograph film of the work or adaptation 
would, apart from this subsection, constitute such an infringement, 
the copyright in the work is not infringed by the making of such a 
recording or film solely for the purpose of simulcasting the work or 
adaptation in digital form.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a recording or film if a 
record embodying the recording or a copy of the film is used for a 
purpose other than:
(a) the simulcasting of the work or adaptation in circumstances 
that do not for any reason constitute an infringement of the 
copyright in the work; or
(b) the making of further records embodying the recording or 
further copies of the film for the purpose of simulcasting the 
work or adaptation in such circumstances.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a recording or film 
unless all records embodying the recording, or all copies of the 
film, made under that subsection are destroyed on or before the 
relevant date specified in the regulations.
  
Division 4  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in literary, dramatic and 
musical works
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), the regulations may specify 
different dates in relation to different classes of sound recordings 
or cinematograph films.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in computer programs  Division 4A
Division 4A—Acts not constituting infringements of 
copyright in computer programs
47AB  Meaning of computer program
In this Division:
computer program includes any literary work that is:
(a) incorporated in, or associated with, a computer program; and
(b) essential to the effective operation of a function of that 
computer program.
47B  Reproduction for normal use or study of computer programs
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program is not infringed by the making of a reproduction 
of the work if:
(a) the reproduction is incidentally and automatically made as 
part of the technical process of running a copy of the 
program for the purposes for which the program was 
designed; and
(b) the running of the copy is done by, or on behalf of, the owner 
or licensee of the copy.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the making of a reproduction of a 
computer program:
(a) from an infringing copy of the computer program; or
(b) contrary to an express direction or licence given by, or on 
behalf of, the owner of the copyright in the computer 
program to the owner or licensee of the copy from which the 
reproduction is made when the owner or licensee of that copy 
acquired it.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program is not infringed by the making of a reproduction 
of the work if:
  
Division 4A  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in computer programs
(a) the reproduction is incidentally and automatically made as 
part of the technical process of running a copy of the 
program for the purpose of studying the ideas behind the 
program and the way in which it functions; and
(b) the running of the copy is done by, or on behalf of, the owner 
or licensee of the copy.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to the making of a reproduction of a 
computer program from an infringing copy of the computer 
program.
(5) In this section:
reproduction, in relation to a computer program, does not include a 
version of the program of the kind referred to in 
paragraph 21(5)(b).
47C  Back-up copy of computer programs
(1) Subject to subsection (4), the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program is not infringed by the making of a reproduction 
of the work if:
(a) the reproduction is made by, or on behalf of, the owner or 
licensee of the copy (the original copy) from which the 
reproduction is made; and
(b) the reproduction is made for use only by, or on behalf of, the 
owner or licensee of the original copy; and
(c) the reproduction is made for any of the following purposes:
(i) to enable the owner or licensee of the original copy to 
use the reproduction in lieu of the original copy and to 
store the original copy;
(ii) to enable the owner or licensee of the original copy to 
store the reproduction for use in lieu of the original copy 
if the original copy is lost, destroyed or rendered 
unusable;
(iii) to enable the owner or licensee of the original copy to 
use the reproduction in lieu of the original copy, or of 
another reproduction made under this subsection, if the 
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in computer programs  Division 4A
original copy, or the other reproduction, is lost, 
destroyed or rendered unusable.
(2) Subject to subsection (4), the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program, and in any work or other subject-matter held 
together with the program on the same computer system, is not 
infringed by the making of a reproduction of the program, or of 
such a work or other subject-matter if:
(a) the reproduction is made by, or on behalf of, the owner or 
licensee of the copy (the original copy) from which the 
reproduction is made; and
(b) the making of the reproduction is part of the normal back-up 
copying of data for security purposes.
(3) Subsection (1) applies in relation to a reproduction of a work made 
for a purpose referred to in subparagraph (1)(c)(iii) whether or not 
other reproductions of the work have previously been made for the 
same purpose from the same copy.
(4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to the making of a 
reproduction of a computer program:
(a) from an infringing copy of the computer program; or
(b) if the owner of the copyright in the computer program has so 
designed the program that copies of it cannot be made 
without modifying the program; or
(c) if a licence to use the original copy, given by, or on behalf of, 
the owner of the copyright in the computer program to the 
owner of the original copy when the owner of that copy 
acquired it, has expired or been terminated.
(5) For the purposes of this section, a reference to a copy of a 
computer program is a reference to any article in which the 
computer program is reproduced in a material form.
(6) In this section:
reproduction, in relation to a computer program, does not include a 
version of the program of the kind referred to in 
paragraph 21(5)(b).
  
Division 4A  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in computer programs
47D  Reproducing computer programs to make interoperable 
products
(1) Subject to this Division, the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program is not infringed by the making of a reproduction 
or adaptation of the work if:
(a) the reproduction or adaptation is made by, or on behalf of, 
the owner or licensee of the copy of the program (the 
original program) used for making the reproduction or 
adaptation; and
(b) the reproduction or adaptation is made for the purpose of 
obtaining information necessary to enable the owner or 
licensee, or a person acting on behalf of the owner or 
licensee, to make independently another program (the new 
program), or an article, to connect to and be used together 
with, or otherwise to interoperate with, the original program 
or any other program; and
(c) the reproduction or adaptation is made only to the extent 
reasonably necessary to obtain the information referred to in 
paragraph (b); and
(d) to the extent that the new program reproduces or adapts the 
original program, it does so only to the extent necessary to 
enable the new program to connect to and be used together 
with, or otherwise to interoperate with, the original program 
or the other program; and
(e) the information referred to in paragraph (b) is not readily 
available to the owner or licensee from another source when 
the reproduction or adaptation is made.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the making of a reproduction or 
adaptation of a computer program from an infringing copy of the 
computer program.
47E  Reproducing computer programs to correct errors
(1) Subject to this Division, the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program is not infringed by the making, on or after 
23 February 1999, of a reproduction or adaptation of the work if:
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in computer programs  Division 4A
(a) the reproduction or adaptation is made by, or on behalf of, 
the owner or licensee of the copy of the program (the 
original copy) used for making the reproduction or 
adaptation; and
(b) the reproduction or adaptation is made for the purpose of 
correcting an error in the original copy that prevents it from 
operating (including in conjunction with other programs or 
with hardware):
(i) as intended by its author; or
(ii) in accordance with any specifications or other 
documentation supplied with the original copy; and
(c) the reproduction or adaptation is made only to the extent 
reasonably necessary to correct the error referred to in 
paragraph (b); and
(d) when the reproduction or adaptation is made, another copy of 
the program that does operate as mentioned in paragraph (b) 
is not available to the owner or licensee within a reasonable 
time at an ordinary commercial price.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the making of a reproduction or 
adaptation of a computer program from an infringing copy of the 
computer program.
47F  Reproducing computer programs for security testing
(1) Subject to this Division, the copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program is not infringed by the making of a reproduction 
or adaptation of the work if:
(a) the reproduction or adaptation is made by, or on behalf of, 
the owner or licensee of the copy of the program (the 
original copy) used for making the reproduction or 
adaptation; and
(b) the reproduction or adaptation is made for the purpose of:
(i) testing in good faith the security of the original copy, or 
of a computer system or network of which the original 
copy is a part; or
  
Division 4A  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in computer programs
(ii) investigating, or correcting, in good faith a security flaw 
in, or the vulnerability to unauthorised access of, the 
original copy, or of a computer system or network of 
which the original copy is a part; and
(c) the reproduction or adaptation is made only to the extent 
reasonably necessary to achieve a purpose referred to in 
paragraph (b); and
(d) the information resulting from the making of the 
reproduction or adaptation is not readily available to the 
owner or licensee from another source when the reproduction 
or adaptation is made.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the making of a reproduction or 
adaptation of a computer program from an infringing copy of the 
computer program.
47G  Unauthorised use of copies or information
(1) If:
(a) a reproduction or adaptation of a literary work that is a 
computer program is made under a prescribed provision; and
(b) the reproduction or adaptation, or any information derived 
from it, is, without the consent of the owner of the copyright 
in the computer program, used, or sold or otherwise supplied 
to a person, for a purpose other than a purpose specified in 
the prescribed provision;
the prescribed provision does not apply, and is taken never to have 
applied, to the making of the reproduction or adaptation.
(2) For the purposes of this section, sections 47B, 47C, 47D, 47E and 
47F are prescribed provisions.
47H  Agreements excluding operation of certain provisions
An agreement, or a provision of an agreement, that excludes or 
limits, or has the effect of excluding or limiting, the operation of 
subsection 47B(3), or section 47C, 47D, 47E or 47F, has no effect.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in artistic works  Division 4B
Division 4B—Acts not constituting infringements of 
copyright in artistic works
47J  Reproducing photograph in different format for private use
(1) This section applies if:
(a) the owner of a photograph (the original photograph) makes 
a reproduction (the main copy) of it for his or her private and 
domestic use instead of the original photograph; and
(b) the original photograph itself is not an infringing copy of a 
work or published edition of a work; and
(c) either:
(i) the original photograph is in hardcopy form and the 
main copy is in electronic form; or
(ii) the original photograph is in electronic form and the 
main copy is in hardcopy form; and
(d) at the time the owner makes the main copy, he or she has not 
made, and is not making, another reproduction of the original 
photograph that embodies the original photograph in a form 
substantially identical to the form of the main copy.
For this purpose, disregard a temporary reproduction of the original 
photograph incidentally made as a necessary part of the technical 
process of making the main copy.
(2) The making of the main copy is not an infringement of copyright:
(a) in the original photograph; or
(b) in a work, or published edition of a work, included in the 
original photograph.
Dealing with main copy may make it an infringing copy
(3) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the main copy is:
(a) sold; or
(b) let for hire; or
(c) by way of trade offered or exposed for sale or hire; or
  
Division 4B  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in artistic works
(d) distributed for the purpose of trade or otherwise.
Note: If the main copy is dealt with as described in subsection (3), then 
copyright may be infringed not only by the making of the main copy 
but also by the dealing with the main copy.
(4) To avoid doubt, paragraph (3)(d) does not apply to a loan of the 
main copy by the lender to a member of the lender’s family or 
household for the member’s private and domestic use.
Reproducing main copy may infringe copyright
(5) Subsection (2) does not prevent the main copy from being an 
infringing copy for the purpose of working out whether this section 
applies again in relation to the making of a reproduction of the 
main copy.
Disposal of original may make the main copy an infringing copy
(6) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the owner of the 
original photograph disposes of it to another person.
Status of temporary reproduction
(7) If subsection (2) applies to the making of the main copy only as a 
result of disregarding the incidental making of a temporary 
reproduction of the original photograph as a necessary part of the 
technical process of making the main copy, then:
(a) if the temporary reproduction is destroyed at the first 
practicable time during or after the making of the main 
copy—the making of the temporary reproduction does not 
infringe copyright in the original photograph or a work, or 
published edition of a work, included in the original 
photograph; or
(b) if the temporary reproduction is not destroyed at that time—
the making of the temporary reproduction is taken always to 
have infringed copyright (if any) subsisting in the original 
photograph or a work, or published edition of a work, 
included in the original photograph.
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
Division 5—Copying of works in libraries or archives
48  Interpretation
In this Division, a reference to an article contained in a periodical 
publication shall be read as a reference to anything (other than an 
artistic work) appearing in such a publication.
48A  Copying by Parliamentary libraries for members of Parliament
The copyright in a work is not infringed by anything done, for the 
sole purpose of assisting a person who is a member of a Parliament 
in the performance of the person’s duties as such a member, by an 
authorized officer of a library, being a library the principal purpose 
of which is to provide library services for members of that 
Parliament.
49  Reproducing and communicating works by libraries and archives 
for users
(1) A person may furnish to the officer in charge of a library or 
archives:
(a) a request in writing to be supplied with a reproduction of an 
article, or a part of an article, contained in a periodical 
publication or of the whole or a part of a published work 
other than an article contained in a periodical publication, 
being a periodical publication or a published work held in the 
collection of a library or archives; and
(b) a declaration signed by him or her stating:
(i) that he or she requires the reproduction for the purpose 
of research or study and will not use it for any other 
purpose; and
(ii) that he or she has not previously been supplied with a 
reproduction of the same article or other work, or the 
same part of the article or other work, as the case may 
be, by an authorized officer of the library or archives.
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
(2) Subject to this section, where a request and declaration referred to 
in subsection (1) are furnished to the officer in charge of a library 
or archives, an authorized officer of the library or archives may, 
unless the declaration contains a statement that to his or her 
knowledge is untrue in a material particular, make, or cause to be 
made, the reproduction to which the request relates and supply the 
reproduction to the person who made the request.
Note: The reproduction could be made from another reproduction of the 
article or published work in the collection of the library or archives 
that was made without infringing copyright because of 
subsection 113H(1) (Preservation).
(2A) A person may make to an authorized officer of a library or 
archives:
(a) a request to be supplied with a reproduction of an article, or 
part of an article, contained in a periodical publication, or of 
the whole or a part of a published work other than an article 
contained in a periodical publication, being a periodical 
publication or a published work held in the collection of a 
library or archives; and
(b) a declaration to the effect that:
(i) the person requires the reproduction for the purpose of 
research or study and will not use it for any other 
purpose;
(ii) the person has not previously been supplied with a 
reproduction of the same article or other work, or the 
same part of the article or other work, as the case may 
be, by an authorized officer of the library or archives; 
and
(iii) by reason of the remoteness of the person’s location, the 
person cannot conveniently furnish to the officer in 
charge of the library or archives a request and 
declaration referred to in subsection (1) in relation to the 
reproduction soon enough to enable the reproduction to 
be supplied to the person before the time by which the 
person requires it.
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
(2B) A request or declaration referred to in subsection (2A) is not 
required to be made in writing.
(2C) Subject to this section, where:
(a) a request and declaration referred to in subsection (2A) are 
made by a person to an authorized officer of a library or 
archives; and
(b) the authorized officer makes a declaration setting out 
particulars of the request and declaration made by the person 
and stating that:
(i) the declaration made by the person, so far as it relates to 
the matters specified in subparagraphs (2A)(b)(i) and 
(ii), does not contain a statement that, to the knowledge 
of the authorized officer, is untrue in a material 
particular; and
(ii) the authorized officer is satisfied that the declaration 
made by the person is true so far as it relates to the 
matter specified in subparagraph (2A)(b)(iii);
an authorized officer of the library or archives may make, or cause 
to be made, the reproduction to which the request relates and 
supply the reproduction to the person.
Note: The reproduction could be made from another reproduction of the 
article or published work in the collection of the library or archives 
that was made without infringing copyright because of 
subsection 113H(1) (Preservation).
(3) Where a charge is made for making and supplying a reproduction 
to which a request under subsection (1) or (2A) relates, 
subsection (2) or (2C), as the case may be, does not apply in 
relation to the request if the amount of the charge exceeds the cost 
of making and supplying the reproduction.
(4) Subsection (2) or (2C) does not apply in relation to a request for a 
reproduction of, or parts of, 2 or more articles contained in the 
same periodical publication unless the articles are requested for the 
same research or course of study.
(5) Subsection (2) or (2C) does not apply to a request for a 
reproduction of the whole of a work (other than an article 
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
contained in a periodical publication), or to a reproduction of a part 
of such a work that contains more than a reasonable portion of the 
work unless:
(a) the work forms part of the library or archives collection; and
(b) before the reproduction is made, an authorized officer has, 
after reasonable investigation, made a declaration stating that 
he or she is satisfied that a reproduction (not being a 
second-hand reproduction) of the work cannot be obtained 
within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price.
(5AA) For the purposes of subsection (5), if the characteristics of the work 
are such that subsection 10(2) or (2A) is relevant to the question 
whether the reproduction contains only a reasonable portion of the 
work, then that question is to be determined solely by reference to 
subsection 10(2) or (2A) and not by reference to the ordinary 
meaning of reasonable portion.
(5AB) For the purposes of paragraph (5)(b), in determining whether a 
reproduction (not being a second-hand reproduction) of the work 
cannot be obtained within a reasonable time at an ordinary 
commercial price, the authorized officer must take into account:
(a) the time by which the person requesting the reproduction 
requires it; and
(b) the time within which a reproduction (not being a 
second-hand reproduction) of the work at an ordinary 
commercial price could be delivered to the person; and
(c) whether an electronic reproduction of the work can be 
obtained within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial 
price.
(5A) If an article contained in a periodical publication, or a published 
work (other than an article contained in a periodical publication) is 
acquired, in electronic form, as part of a library or archives 
collection, the officer in charge of the library or archives may make 
it available online within the premises of the library or archives in 
such a manner that users cannot, by using any equipment supplied 
by the library or archives:
(a) make an electronic reproduction of the article or work; or
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
(b) communicate the article or work.
(6) The copyright in an article contained in a periodical publication is 
not infringed by the making, in relation to a request under 
subsection (1) or (2A), of a reproduction of the article, or of a part 
of the article, in accordance with subsection (2) or (2C), as the case 
may be, unless the reproduction is supplied to a person other than 
the person who made the request.
(7) The copyright in a published work other than an article contained 
in a periodical publication is not infringed by the making, in 
relation to a request under subsection (1) or (2A), of a reproduction 
of the work, or of a part of the work, in accordance with 
subsection (2) or (2C), as the case may be, unless the reproduction 
is supplied to a person other than the person who made the request.
(7A) Subsections (6) and (7) do not apply to the making under 
subsection (2) or (2C) of an electronic reproduction of:
(a) an article, or a part of an article, contained in a periodical 
publication; or
(b) the whole or part of a published work, other than such an 
article;
in relation to a request under this section for communication to the 
person who made the request unless:
(c) before or when the reproduction is communicated to the 
person, the person is notified in accordance with the 
regulations:
(i) that the reproduction has been made under this section 
and that the article or work might be subject to 
copyright protection under this Act; and
(ii) about such other matters (if any) as are prescribed; and
(d) as soon as practicable after the reproduction is communicated 
to the person, the reproduction made under subsection (2) or 
(2C) and held by the library or archives is destroyed.
(7B) It is not an infringement of copyright in an article contained in a 
periodical publication, or of copyright in a published work, to 
communicate it in accordance with subsection (2), (2C) or (5A).
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
(8) The regulations may exclude the application of subsection (6) or 
(7) in such cases as are specified in the regulations.
(9) In this section:
archives means an archives all or part of whose collection is 
accessible to members of the public.
library means a library all or part of whose collection is accessible 
to members of the public directly or through interlibrary loans.
supply includes supply by way of a communication.
Note: Under section 203F, it is an offence to make a false or misleading 
declaration for the purposes of this section. Sections 203A and 203G 
create offences relating to the keeping of declarations made for the 
purposes of this section.
50  Reproducing and communicating works by libraries or archives 
for other libraries or archives
(1) The officer in charge of a library may request, or cause another 
person to request, the officer in charge of another library to supply 
the officer in charge of the first-mentioned library with a 
reproduction of an article, or a part of an article, contained in a 
periodical publication, or of the whole or a part of a published 
work other than an article contained in a periodical publication, 
being a periodical publication or a published work held in the 
collection of a library:
(a) for the purpose of including the reproduction in the collection 
of the first-mentioned library;
(aa) in a case where the principal purpose of the first-mentioned 
library is to provide library services for members of a 
Parliament—for the purpose of assisting a person who is a 
member of that Parliament in the performance of the person’s 
duties as such a member; or
(b) for the purpose of supplying the reproduction to a person 
who has made a request for the reproduction under 
section 49.
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
(2) Subject to this section, where a request is made by or on behalf of 
the officer in charge of a library to the officer in charge of another 
library under subsection (1), an authorized officer of the 
last-mentioned library may make, or cause to be made, the 
reproduction to which the request relates and supply the 
reproduction to the officer in charge of the first-mentioned library.
Note: The reproduction could be made from another reproduction of the 
article or published work in the collection of the other library that was 
made without infringing copyright because of subsection 113H(1) 
(Preservation).
(3) Where, under subsection (2), an authorized officer of a library 
makes, or causes to be made, a reproduction of the whole or part of 
a work (including an article contained in a periodical publication) 
and supplies it to the officer in charge of another library in 
accordance with a request made under subsection (1):
(a) the reproduction shall, for all purposes of this Act, be deemed 
to have been made on behalf of an authorized officer of the 
other library for the purpose for which the reproduction was 
requested; and
(b) an action shall not be brought against the body administering 
that first-mentioned library, or against any officer or 
employee of that library, for infringement of copyright by 
reason of the making or supplying of that reproduction.
(4) Subject to this section, if a reproduction of the whole or a part of 
an article contained in a periodical publication, or of any other 
published work, is, by virtue of subsection (3), taken to have been 
made on behalf of an authorised officer of a library, the copyright 
in the article or other work is not infringed:
(a) by the making of the reproduction; or
(b) if the work is supplied under subsection (2) by way of a 
communication—by the making of the communication.
(5) The regulations may exclude the application of subsection (4) in 
such cases as are specified in the regulations.
(6) Where a charge is made for making and supplying a reproduction 
to which a request under subsection (1) relates, subsection (3) does 
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
not apply in relation to the request if the amount of the charge 
exceeds the cost of making and supplying the reproduction.
(7) Where:
(a) a reproduction (in this subsection referred to as the relevant 
reproduction) of, or of a part of, an article, or of the whole or 
a part of another work, is supplied under subsection (2) to the 
officer in charge of a library; and
(b) a reproduction of the same article or other work, or of the 
same part of the article or other work, as the case may be, has 
previously been supplied under subsection (2) for the purpose 
of inclusion in the collection of the library;
subsection (4) does not apply to or in relation to the relevant 
reproduction unless, as soon as practicable after the request under 
subsection (1) relating to the relevant reproduction is made, an 
authorized officer of the library makes a declaration:
(c) setting out particulars of the request (including the purpose 
for which the relevant reproduction was requested); and
(d) stating that the reproduction referred to in paragraph (b) has 
been lost, destroyed or damaged, as the case requires.
(7A) If:
(a) a reproduction is made of the whole of a work (other than an 
article contained in a periodical publication) or of a part of 
such a work, being a part that contains more than a 
reasonable portion of the work; and
(b) the work from which the reproduction is made is in hardcopy 
form; and
(c) the reproduction is supplied under subsection (2) to the 
officer in charge of a library;
subsection (4) does not apply in relation to the reproduction unless:
(d) in a case where the principal purpose of the library is to 
provide library services for members of a Parliament—the 
reproduction is so supplied for the purpose of assisting a 
person who is a member of that Parliament in the 
performance of the person’s duties as such a member; or
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
(e) as soon as practicable after the request under subsection (1) 
relating to the reproduction is made, an authorized officer of 
the library makes a declaration:
(i) setting out particulars of the request (including the 
purpose for which the reproduction was requested); and
(ii) stating that, after reasonable investigation, the 
authorized officer is satisfied that a copy (not being a 
second-hand copy) of the work cannot be obtained 
within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial 
price.
(7B) If:
(a) a reproduction is made of the whole of a work (including an 
article contained in a periodical publication) or of a part of 
such a work, whether or not the part contains more than a 
reasonable portion of the work; and
(b) the work from which the reproduction is made is in electronic 
form; and
(c) the reproduction is supplied under subsection (2) to the 
officer in charge of a library;
subsection (4) does not apply in relation to the reproduction unless:
(d) in a case where the principal purpose of the library is to 
provide library services for members of a Parliament—the 
reproduction is so supplied for the purpose of assisting a 
person who is a member of that Parliament in the 
performance of the person’s duties as such a member; or
(e) as soon as practicable after the request under subsection (1) 
relating to the reproduction is made, an authorized officer of 
the library makes a declaration:
(i) setting out particulars of the request (including the 
purpose for which the reproduction was requested); and
(ii) if the reproduction is of the whole, or of more than a 
reasonable portion, of a work other than an article—
stating that, after reasonable investigation, the 
authorised officer is satisfied that the work cannot be 
obtained in electronic form within a reasonable time at 
an ordinary commercial price; and
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
(iii) if the reproduction is of a reasonable portion, or less 
than a reasonable portion, of a work other than an 
article—stating that, after reasonable investigation, the 
authorised officer is satisfied that the portion cannot be 
obtained in electronic form, either separately or together 
with a reasonable amount of other material, within a 
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price; and
(iv) if the reproduction is of the whole or of a part of an 
article—stating that, after reasonable investigation, the 
authorised officer is satisfied that the article cannot be 
obtained on its own in electronic form within a 
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price.
(7BA) For the purposes of subsections (7A) and (7B), if the 
characteristics of the work are such that subsection 10(2) or (2A) is 
relevant to the question whether the reproduction contains only a 
reasonable portion of the work, then that question is to be 
determined solely by reference to subsection 10(2) or (2A) and not 
by reference to the ordinary meaning of reasonable portion.
(7BB) For the purposes of subparagraphs (7A)(e)(ii) and (7B)(e)(ii), (iii) 
and (iv), in determining whether a copy of the work, the work, the 
portion of the work or the article (as appropriate) cannot be 
obtained within a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price, 
the authorized officer must take into account:
(a) the time by which the person requesting the reproduction 
under section 49 requires the reproduction; and
(b) the time within which a reproduction (not being a 
second-hand reproduction) of the work at an ordinary 
commercial price could be delivered to the person; and
(c) whether the copy, work, portion or article can be obtained in 
electronic form within a reasonable time at an ordinary 
commercial price.
(7C) If:
(a) a reproduction is made in electronic form by or on behalf of 
an authorised officer of a library of the whole of a work 
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
(including an article contained in a periodical publication) or 
of a part of such a work; and
(b) the reproduction is supplied under subsection (2) to the 
officer in charge of another library;
subsection (3) does not apply in relation to the reproduction unless, 
as soon as practicable after the reproduction is supplied to the other 
library the reproduction made for the purpose of the supply and 
held by the first-mentioned library is destroyed.
(8) Subsection (4) does not apply to a reproduction or communication 
of all or part of 2 or more articles that are contained in the same 
periodical publication and that have been requested for the same 
purpose unless:
(a) the purpose is the one described in paragraph (1)(aa) 
(assisting a member of a Parliament perform his or her 
duties); or
(b) the purpose is the one described in paragraph (1)(b) 
(supplying a reproduction to a person requesting it under 
section 49 for research or study) and the reproduction of the 
articles was requested under section 49 for the same research 
or course of study.
(10) In this section:
library means:
(a) a library all or part of whose collection is accessible to 
members of the public directly or through interlibrary loans; 
or
(b) a library whose principal purpose is to provide library 
services for members of a Parliament; or
(c) an archives all or part of whose collection is accessible to 
members of the public.
supply includes supply by way of a communication.
Note: Under section 203F, it is an offence to make a false or misleading 
declaration for the purposes of this section. Sections 203A and 203G 
create offences relating to the keeping of declarations made for the 
purposes of this section.
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
51  Reproducing and communicating unpublished works in libraries 
or archives
(1) Where, at a time more than 50 years after the end of the calendar 
year in which the author of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work died, copyright subsists in the work but:
(a) the work has not been published; and
(b) a reproduction of the work, or, in the case of a literary, 
dramatic or musical work, the manuscript of the work, is kept 
in the collection of a library or archives where it is, subject to 
any regulations governing that collection, open to public 
inspection;
the copyright in the work is not infringed:
(c) by the making or communication of a reproduction of the 
work by a person for the purposes of research or study or 
with a view to publication; or
(d) by the making or communication of a reproduction of the 
work by, or on behalf of, the officer in charge of the library 
or archives if the reproduction is supplied (whether by way of 
communication or otherwise) to a person who satisfies the 
officer in charge of the library or archives that the person 
requires the reproduction for the purposes of research or 
study, or with a view to publication, and that the person will 
not use it for any other purpose.
(2) If the manuscript, or a reproduction, of an unpublished thesis or 
other similar literary work is kept in a library of a university or 
other similar institution, or in an archives, the copyright in the 
thesis or other work is not infringed by the making or 
communication of a reproduction of the thesis or other work by or 
on behalf of the officer in charge of the library or archives if the 
reproduction is supplied (whether by communication or otherwise) 
to a person who satisfies an authorized officer of the library or 
archives that he or she requires the reproduction for the purposes of 
research or study.
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
51AA  Reproducing and communicating works in care of National 
Archives of Australia
(1) The copyright in a work that is kept in the collection of an archives 
covered by subparagraph (a)(i) or paragraph (aa) of the definition 
of archives in subsection 10(1), where it is open to public 
inspection, is not infringed by the making or communication by, or 
on behalf of, the officer in charge of the archives:
(a) of a single working copy of the work; or
(b) of a single reference copy of the work for supply to the 
central office of the National Archives of Australia; or
(c) on the written request for a reference copy of the work by an 
officer of the National Archives of Australia in a regional 
office of the Archives, where the officer in charge is satisfied 
that a reference copy of the work has not been previously 
supplied to that regional office—of a single reference copy of 
the work for supply to that regional office; or
(d) where the officer in charge is satisfied that a reference copy 
of the work supplied to a regional office of the National 
Archives of Australia is lost, damaged or destroyed and an 
officer of the Archives in that regional office makes a written 
request for a replacement copy of the work—of a single 
replacement copy of the work for supply to that regional 
office; or
(e) where the officer in charge is satisfied that a reference copy 
of the work supplied to the central office of the National 
Archives of Australia is lost, damaged or destroyed—of a 
single replacement copy of the work for supply to that central 
office.
(2) In this section:
reference copy, in relation to a work, means a reproduction of the 
work made from a working copy for supply to the central office, or 
to a regional office, of the National Archives of Australia for use 
by that office in providing access to the work to members of the 
public.
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
replacement copy, in relation to a work, means a reproduction of 
the work made from a working copy for the purpose of replacing a 
reference copy of the work that is lost, damaged or destroyed.
working copy, in relation to a work, means a reproduction of the 
work made for the purpose of enabling the National Archives of 
Australia to retain the copy and use it for making reference copies 
and replacement copies of the work.
52  Publication of unpublished works kept in libraries or archives
(1) Where:
(a) a published literary, dramatic or musical work (in this section 
referred to as the new work) incorporates the whole or a part 
of a work (in this section referred to as the old work) to 
which subsection 51(1) applied immediately before the new 
work was published;
(b) before the new work was published, the prescribed notice of 
the intended publication of the work had been given; and
(c) immediately before the new work was published, the identity 
of the owner of the copyright in the old work was not known 
to the publishers of the new work;
then, for the purposes of this Act, the first publication of the new 
work, and any subsequent publication of the new work whether in 
the same or in an altered form, shall, in so far as it constitutes a 
publication of the old work, be deemed not to be an infringement 
of the copyright in the old work or an unauthorized publication of 
the old work.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply to a subsequent 
publication of the new work incorporating a part of the old work 
that was not included in the first publication of the new work 
unless:
(a) subsection 51(1) would, but for this section, have applied to 
that part of the old work immediately before that subsequent 
publication;
(b) before that subsequent publication, the prescribed notice of 
the intended publication had been given; and
  
Copying of works in libraries or archives  Division 5
(c) immediately before that subsequent publication, the identity 
of the owner of the copyright in the old work was not known 
to the publisher of that subsequent publication.
(3) If a work, or part of a work, has been published and, because of 
this section, the publication is taken not to be an infringement of 
the copyright in the work, the copyright in the work is not 
infringed by a person who, after the publication took place:
(a) broadcasts the work, or that part of the work; or
(b) electronically transmits the work, or that part of the work 
(other than in a broadcast) for a fee payable to the person 
who made the transmission; or
(c) performs the work, or that part of the work, in public; or
(d) makes a record of the work, or that part of the work.
53  Application of Division to illustrations accompanying articles and 
other works
Where an article, thesis or literary, dramatic or musical work is 
accompanied by artistic works provided for the purpose of 
explaining or illustrating the article, thesis or other work (in this 
section referred to as the illustrations), the preceding sections of 
this Division apply as if:
(a) where any of those sections provides that the copyright in the 
article, thesis or work is not infringed—the reference to that 
copyright included a reference to any copyright in the 
illustrations; and
(b) a reference in section 49, section 50 or section 51 to a 
reproduction of the article, thesis or work included a 
reference to a reproduction of the article, thesis or work 
together with a reproduction of the illustrations; and
(c) a reference in section 49 or section 50 to a reproduction of a 
part of the article or work included a reference to a 
reproduction of that part of the article or work together with a 
reproduction of the illustrations that were provided for the 
purpose of explaining or illustrating that part; and
  
Division 5  Copying of works in libraries or archives
(d) a reference in section 52 to the doing of any act in relation to 
the work included a reference to the doing of that act in 
relation to the work together with the illustrations.
  
Recording of musical works  Division 6
Division 6—Recording of musical works
54  Interpretation
(1A) In this Division:
record means a disc, tape, paper or other device in which sounds 
are embodied.
(1) For the purposes of this Division:
(a) a reference to a musical work shall be read as a reference to 
the work in its original form or to an adaptation of the work;
(b) a reference to the owner of the copyright in a literary, 
dramatic or musical work shall, unless the contrary intention 
appears, be read as a reference to the person who is entitled 
to authorize the making in, and the importation into, 
Australia of records of the work; and
(c) a reference to sale of a record by retail or to retail sale of a 
record shall be read as not including a reference to:
(i) sale for a consideration not consisting wholly of money; 
or
(ii) sale by a person not ordinarily carrying on the business 
of making or selling records.
(2) For the purposes of this Division, where a musical work is 
comprised partly in one record and partly in another record or other 
records, all the records shall be treated as if they constituted a 
single record.
(3) A reference in this Division to a record of a musical work does not 
include a reference to a sound-track associated with visual images 
forming part of a cinematograph film.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), this Division applies to a record of a part 
of a musical work as it applies to a record of the whole work.
(5) Section 55:
  
Division 6  Recording of musical works
(a) does not apply to a record of a whole work unless the 
previous record referred to in paragraph 55(1)(a) was a 
record of the whole work; and
(b) does not apply to a record of a part of a work unless that 
previous record was a record of that part of the work.
Original form
(6) The definition of original form in subsection 10(1) does not apply 
in this Division.
55  Conditions upon which manufacturer may make records of 
musical work
(1) Subject to this Division, the copyright in a musical work is not 
infringed by a person (in this section referred to as the 
manufacturer) who makes, in Australia, a record of the work if:
(a) a record of the work:
(i) has previously been made in, or imported into, Australia 
for the purpose of retail sale and was so made or 
imported by, or with the licence of, the owner of the 
copyright in the work;
(ii) has previously been made in Australia for use in making 
other records for the purpose of retail sale and was so 
made by, or with the licence of, the owner of the 
copyright in the work;
(iii) has previously been made in, or imported into, a country 
other than Australia for the purpose of retail sale, being 
a country that, at the time of the previous making or 
importation, was specified in the regulations to be a 
country in relation to which this Division applies, and 
was so made or imported by, or with the licence of, the 
person who was, under the law of that country, the 
owner of the copyright in the work; or
(iv) has previously been made in a country other than 
Australia for use in making other records for the 
purpose of retail sale, being a country that, at the time of 
  
Recording of musical works  Division 6
the previous making, was specified in the regulations to 
be a country in relation to which this Division applies, 
and was so made by, or with the licence of, the person 
who was, under the law of that country, the owner of the 
copyright in the work;
(b) before the making of the record, the prescribed notice of the 
intended making of the record was given to the owner of the 
copyright;
(c) the manufacturer intends to sell the record by retail, or to 
supply it for the purpose of its being sold by retail by a 
person other than the manufacturer, or intends to use it for 
making other records that are to be so sold or supplied; and
(d) where the record is so sold or supplied by the manufacturer:
(i) the sale or supply is made with the licence of the owner 
of the copyright; and
(ii) the prescribed royalty is paid to the owner of the 
copyright in the manner agreed between the 
manufacturer and the owner of the copyright or, failing 
such agreement, determined by the Copyright Tribunal 
under section 152B.
(3) Subparagraph (1)(d)(i) does not apply in relation to a record of a 
work (other than a work that was made for the purpose of being 
performed, or has been performed, in association with a dramatic 
work or has been included in a cinematograph film) if the sale or 
supply is made after the expiration of the prescribed period after 
the earliest of the following dates:
(a) the date of the first making in, or the date of the first 
importation into, Australia of a previous record of the work 
in circumstances referred to in subparagraph (1)(a)(i) or (ii);
(b) the date of the first supplying (whether by sale or otherwise) 
to the public in a country referred to in 
subparagraph (1)(a)(iii) or (iv) of a previous record of the 
work made in, or imported into, that country in 
circumstances referred to in that subparagraph.
  
Division 6  Recording of musical works
(4) Regulations prescribing a period for the purposes of the last 
preceding subsection may prescribe different periods in relation to 
different classes of records.
(5) If, apart from this subsection, the amount of royalty payable in 
respect of a record under this section would be less than one cent, 
that amount of royalty is one cent.
(6) In this section:
prescribed royalty, in relation to a record of a musical work, 
means:
(a) such amount of royalty as is agreed between the 
manufacturer and the owner of the copyright in the work or, 
failing such agreement, as is determined by the Copyright 
Tribunal under section 152A; or
(b) if no such agreement or determination is in force—an amount 
equal to 6.25% of the retail selling price of the record.
57  Provisions relating to royalty where 2 or more works are on the 
one record
Where a record comprises 2 or more musical works, whether or not 
there is any other matter comprised in the record:
(a) if the record includes a work in which copyright does not 
subsist or works in which copyrights do not subsist the 
royalty payable in respect of the record is, subject to the next 
succeeding paragraph, the amount that bears to the amount 
that, but for this section, would be the amount of the royalty 
the same proportion as the number of works in the record in 
which copyrights subsist bears to the total number of works 
in the record; and
(b) if the record includes 2 or more works in which copyrights 
subsist:
(i) subject to this Division, the royalty payable in respect of 
the record shall not be less than One cent in respect of 
each work in the record in which copyright subsists; and
  
Recording of musical works  Division 6
(ii) if the owners of the copyrights in the works in the 
record in which copyrights subsist are different persons 
there shall be paid to the owner of the copyright in each 
work, in respect of that work, an amount ascertained by 
dividing the amount of the royalty payable in respect of 
the record by the number of works in the record in 
which copyrights subsist.
59  Conditions upon which manufacturer may include part of a 
literary or dramatic work in a record of a musical work
(1) Where:
(a) a person makes in Australia a record comprising the 
performance of a musical work in which words are sung, or 
are spoken incidentally to or in association with the music, 
whether or not there is any other matter comprised in the 
record;
(b) copyright does not subsist in that work or, if copyright so 
subsists, the requirements specified in subsection 55(1) are 
complied with in relation to that copyright;
(c) the words consist or form part of a literary or dramatic work 
in which copyright subsists;
(d) a record of the musical work in which those words, or words 
substantially the same as those words, were sung, or were 
spoken incidentally to or in association with the music:
(i) has previously been made in, or imported into, Australia 
for the purpose of retail sale and was so made or 
imported by, or with the licence of, the owner of the 
copyright in the literary or dramatic work;
(ii) has previously been made in Australia for use in making 
other records for the purpose of retail sale and was so 
made by, or with the licence of, the owner of the 
copyright in the literary or dramatic work;
(iii) has previously been made in, or imported into, a country 
other than Australia for the purpose of retail sale, being 
a country that, at the time of the previous making or 
importation, was specified in the regulations to be a 
  
Division 6  Recording of musical works
country in relation to which this Division applies, and 
was so made or imported by, or with the licence of, the 
person who was, under the law of that country, the 
owner of the copyright in the literary or dramatic work; 
or
(iv) has previously been made in a country other than 
Australia for use in making other records for the 
purpose of retail sale, being a country that, at the time of 
the previous making, was specified in the regulations to 
be a country in relation to which this Division applies, 
and was so made by, or with the licence of, the person 
who was, under the law of that country, the owner of the 
copyright in the literary or dramatic work; and
(e) the like notice was given to the owner of the copyright in the 
literary or dramatic work as is required by paragraph 55(1)(b) 
to be given to the owner of the copyright (if any) in the 
musical work and there is paid to the owner of the copyright 
in the literary or dramatic work such amount (if any) as is 
ascertained in accordance with this section;
the making of the record does not constitute an infringement of the 
copyright in the literary or dramatic work.
(2) Where copyright does not subsist in the musical work, the amount 
to be paid in respect of the literary or dramatic work is an amount 
equal to the royalty that, but for this section, would have been 
payable in respect of the musical work if copyright had subsisted in 
the musical work.
(3) Where copyright subsists in the musical work as well as in the 
literary or dramatic work:
(a) if the copyrights in those works are owned by the same 
person—an amount is not payable in respect of the literary or 
dramatic work; or
(b) if the copyrights in those works are owned by different 
persons—the royalty that, but for this section, would have 
been payable in respect of the musical work shall be 
apportioned between them in such manner as they agree, or, 
  
Recording of musical works  Division 6
in default of the agreement, as is determined by the 
Copyright Tribunal on the application of either of them.
(4) Where the owner of the copyright in a musical work and the owner 
of the copyright in a literary or dramatic work do not agree on the 
manner in which an amount is to be apportioned between them but 
the person who made the record gives an undertaking in writing to 
each owner to pay to him or her the portion of that amount that the 
Tribunal determines to be payable to him or her, then:
(a) paragraph 55(1)(d) and paragraph (1)(e) of this section have 
effect as if the payments referred to in those paragraphs had 
been made; and
(b) the person who made the record is liable, when the amount to 
which an undertaking relates is determined, to pay that 
amount to the owner of the copyright to whom the 
undertaking was given and the owner may recover that 
amount in a court of competent jurisdiction from that person 
as a debt due to the owner.
60  Records made partly for retail sale and partly for gratuitous 
disposal
Where a person makes, in Australia, a number of records 
embodying the same sound recording, being a recording of a 
musical work or of a musical work and of words consisting or 
forming part of a literary or dramatic work, with the intention of:
(a) selling by retail, or supplying for sale by retail by another 
person, a substantial proportion of the records (in this section 
referred to as the records made for retail sale); and
(b) disposing gratuitously of the remainder of the records or 
supplying the remainder of the records for gratuitous disposal 
by another person;
this Division applies in relation to the records other than the 
records made for retail sale as if:
(c) those records had been made with the intention of selling 
them by retail or of supplying them for sale by retail by 
another person;
  
Division 6  Recording of musical works
(d) the gratuitous disposal of those records by the maker of the 
records, or the supplying of those records by the maker of the 
records for gratuitous disposal by another person, were a sale 
of the records by retail; and
(e) the retail selling price of those records were the same as the 
retail selling price of the records made for retail sale.
61  Making inquiries in relation to previous records
Where:
(a) a person makes inquiries, as prescribed, for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether a record of a musical work, or a record 
of a musical work in which words consisting or forming part 
of a literary or dramatic work were sung or spoken, has 
previously been made in, or imported into, Australia by, or 
with the licence of, the owner of the copyright in the musical 
work or in the literary or dramatic work, as the case may be, 
for the purpose of retail sale or for use in making other 
records for the purpose of retail sale; and
(b) an answer to those inquiries is not received within the 
prescribed period;
a record of that musical work, or a record of that work in which 
those words were sung or spoken, as the case may be, shall, for the 
purposes of the application of this Division:
(c) in relation to the person who made the inquiries; or
(d) in relation to a person who makes records of the musical 
work, or records of that work in which those words or 
substantially the same words are sung or spoken, for the 
purpose of supplying those records to the person who made 
the inquiries in pursuance of an agreement entered into 
between those persons for the making of the records;
be taken to have been previously made in, or imported into, 
Australia with the licence of the owner of that copyright for the 
purpose of retail sale or for use in making other records for the 
purpose of retail sale, as the case may be.
  
Recording of musical works  Division 6
64  Sections 55 and 59 to be disregarded in determining whether an 
infringement has been committed by the importation of 
records
For the purpose of any provision of this Act relating to imported 
articles, in determining whether the making of a record made 
outside Australia would have constituted an infringement of 
copyright if the record had been made in Australia by the importer, 
sections 55 and 59 shall be disregarded.
  
Division 7  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in artistic works
Division 7—Acts not constituting infringements of 
copyright in artistic works
65  Sculptures and certain other works in public places
(1) This section applies to sculptures and to works of artistic 
craftsmanship of the kind referred to in paragraph (c) of the 
definition of artistic work in section 10.
(2) The copyright in a work to which this section applies that is 
situated, otherwise than temporarily, in a public place, or in 
premises open to the public, is not infringed by the making of a 
painting, drawing, engraving or photograph of the work or by the 
inclusion of the work in a cinematograph film or in a television 
broadcast.
66  Buildings and models of buildings
The copyright in a building or a model of a building is not 
infringed by the making of a painting, drawing, engraving or 
photograph of the building or model or by the inclusion of the 
building or model in a cinematograph film or in a television 
broadcast.
67  Incidental filming or televising of artistic works
Without prejudice to the last two preceding sections, the copyright 
in an artistic work is not infringed by the inclusion of the work in a 
cinematograph film or in a television broadcast if its inclusion in 
the film or broadcast is only incidental to the principal matters 
represented in the film or broadcast.
68  Publication of artistic works
The copyright in an artistic work is not infringed by the publication 
of a painting, drawing, engraving, photograph or cinematograph 
film if, by virtue of section 65, section 66 or section 67, the making 
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in artistic works  Division 7
of that painting, drawing, engraving, photograph or film did not 
constitute an infringement of the copyright.
70  Reproduction for purpose of including work in television 
broadcast
(1) Where the inclusion of an artistic work in a television broadcast 
made by a person would not (whether by reason of an assignment 
or licence or of the operation of a provision of this Act) constitute 
an infringement of copyright in the work but the making by the 
person of a cinematograph film of the work would, apart from this 
subsection, constitute such an infringement, the copyright in the 
work is not infringed by the making by the person of such a film 
solely for the purpose of the inclusion of the work in a television 
broadcast.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to a film if 
a copy of the film is used for a purpose other than:
(a) the inclusion of the work in a television broadcast in 
circumstances that do not (whether by reason of an 
assignment or licence or of the operation of a provision of 
this Act) constitute an infringement of the copyright in the 
work; or
(b) the making of further copies of the film for the purpose of the 
inclusion of the work in such a broadcast.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a film where a copy of 
the film is used for the purpose of the inclusion of the work in a 
television broadcast made by a person who is not the maker of the 
film unless the maker has paid to the owner of the copyright in the 
work such amount as they agree or, in default of agreement, has 
given an undertaking in writing to the owner to pay to the owner 
such amount as is determined by the Copyright Tribunal, on the 
application of either of them, to be equitable remuneration to the 
owner for the making of the film.
(4) A person who has given an undertaking referred to in the last 
preceding subsection is liable, when the Copyright Tribunal has 
determined the amount to which the undertaking relates, to pay that 
  
Division 7  Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in artistic works
amount to the owner of the copyright in the work and the owner 
may recover that amount in a court of competent jurisdiction from 
the person as a debt due to the owner.
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a film unless, before 
the expiration of the period of 12 months commencing on the day 
on which any of the copies of the film is first used for including the 
work in a television broadcast in accordance with that subsection, 
or before the expiration of such further period, if any, as is agreed 
between the maker of the film and the owner of the copyright in 
the work, all the copies of the film are destroyed or are transferred, 
with the consent of the Director-General of the National Archives 
of Australia, to the care (within the meaning of the Archives Act 
1983) of the National Archives of Australia.
(6) The Director-General of the National Archives of Australia must 
not consent to the transfer to the care of the National Archives of 
Australia in accordance with subsection (5) of a copy of a film 
unless he or she has certified that the film is of an exceptional 
documentary character.
72  Reproduction of part of work in later work
(1) The copyright in an artistic work is not infringed by the making of 
a later artistic work by the same author if, in making the later work, 
the author does not repeat or imitate the main design of the earlier 
work.
(2) The last preceding subsection has effect notwithstanding that part 
of the earlier work is reproduced in the later work and that, in 
reproducing the later work, the author used a mould, cast, sketch, 
plan, model or study made for the purposes of the earlier work.
73  Reconstruction of buildings
(1) Where copyright subsists in a building, the copyright is not 
infringed by a reconstruction of that building.
  
Acts not constituting infringements of copyright in artistic works  Division 7
(2) Where a building has been constructed in accordance with 
architectural drawings or plans in which copyright subsists and has 
been so constructed by, or with the licence of, the owner of that 
copyright, that copyright is not infringed by a later reconstruction 
of the building by reference to those drawings or plans.
  
Division 8  Designs
Division 8—Designs
74  Corresponding design
(1) In this Division:
corresponding design, in relation to an artistic work, means visual 
features of shape or configuration which, when embodied in a 
product, result in a reproduction of that work, whether or not the 
visual features constitute a design that is capable of being 
registered under the Designs Act 2003.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1):
embodied in, in relation to a product, includes woven into, 
impressed on or worked into the product.
75  Copyright protection where corresponding design registered
Subject to section 76, where copyright subsists in an artistic work 
(whether made before the commencement of this section or 
otherwise) and a corresponding design is or has been registered 
under the Designs Act 1906 or the Designs Act 2003 on or after 
that commencement, it is not an infringement of that copyright to 
reproduce the work by embodying that, or any other, 
corresponding design in a product.
76  False registration of industrial designs under the Designs Act 
2003
(1) This section applies if:
(a) proceedings (copyright proceedings) are brought under this 
Act in relation to an artistic work in which copyright subsists; 
and
(b) a corresponding design was registered under the Designs Act 
2003; and
  
Designs  Division 8
(c) the exclusive right in the design had not expired by effluxion 
of time before the copyright proceedings began; and
(d) it is established in the copyright proceedings that:
(i) none of the persons who are registered owners of the 
registered design are entitled persons in relation to the 
design; and
(ii) none of those persons were registered with the 
knowledge of the owner of the copyright in the artistic 
work.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), for the purposes of the copyright 
proceedings:
(a) the design is taken never to have been registered under the 
Designs Act 2003; and
(b) section 75 does not apply in relation to anything done in 
respect of the design; and
(c) nothing in the Designs Act 2003 constitutes a defence.
(3) Ignore subsection (2) if it is established in the copyright 
proceedings that the act to which the proceedings relate was done:
(a) by an assignee of, or under a licence granted by, the 
registered owner of the registered design; and
(b) in good faith relying on the registration and without notice of 
any proceedings (whether or not before a court) to revoke the 
registration or to rectify the entry in the Register of Designs 
in relation to the design.
77  Application of artistic works as industrial designs without 
registration of the designs
(1) This section applies where:
(a) copyright subsists in an artistic work (other than a building or 
a model of a building, or a work of artistic craftsmanship) 
whether made before the commencement of this section or 
otherwise;
(b) a corresponding design is or has been applied industrially, 
whether in Australia or elsewhere, and whether before or 
  
Division 8  Designs
after the commencement of this section, by or with the 
licence of the owner of the copyright in the place of 
industrial application; and
(c) at any time on or after the commencement of this section, 
products to which the corresponding design has been so 
applied (the products made to the corresponding design) are 
sold, let for hire or offered or exposed for sale or hire, 
whether in Australia or elsewhere; and
(d) at that time, the corresponding design is not registrable under 
the Designs Act 2003 or has not been registered under that 
Act or under the Designs Act 1906.
(1A) This section also applies if:
(a) a complete specification that discloses a product made to the 
corresponding design; or
(b) a representation of a product made to the corresponding 
design and included in a design application;
is published in Australia, whether or not paragraphs (1)(b) and (c) 
are satisfied in relation to the corresponding design.
(2) It is not an infringement of the copyright in the artistic work to 
reproduce the work, on or after the day on which:
(a) products made to the corresponding design are first sold, let 
for hire or offered or exposed for sale or hire; or
(b) a complete specification that discloses a product made to the 
corresponding design is first published in Australia; or
(c) a representation of a product made to the corresponding 
design and included in a design application is first published 
in Australia;
by embodying that, or any other, corresponding design in a 
product.
(3) This section does not apply in relation to any articles or products in 
respect of which, at the time when they were sold, let for hire or 
offered or exposed for sale or hire, the corresponding design 
concerned was excluded from registration by regulations made 
under the Designs Act 1906 or the Designs Act 2003, and, for the 
  
Designs  Division 8
purposes of any proceedings under this Act, a design shall be 
conclusively presumed to have been so excluded if:
(a) before the commencement of the proceedings, an application 
for the registration of the design under the Designs Act 1906 
in respect of those articles, or under the Designs Act 2003 in 
respect of those products, had been refused;
(b) the reason, or one of the reasons, given for the refusal was 
that the design was excluded from registration under that Act 
by regulations made under that Act; and
(c) when the proceedings were commenced, no appeal against 
the refusal had been allowed or was pending.
(4) The regulations may specify the circumstances in which a design 
is, for the purposes of this section, to be taken to be applied 
industrially.
(5) In this section:
building or model of a building does not include a portable 
building such as a shed, a pre-constructed swimming pool, a 
demountable building or similar portable building.
complete specification has the same meaning as in the Patents Act 
1990.
design application has the same meaning as in the Designs Act 
2003.
representation, in relation to a design, has the same meaning as 
in the Designs Act 2003.
77A  Certain reproductions of an artistic work do not infringe 
copyright
(1) It is not an infringement of copyright in an artistic work to 
reproduce the artistic work, or communicate that reproduction, if:
(a) the reproduction is derived from a three-dimensional product 
that embodies a corresponding design in relation to the 
artistic work; and
  
Division 8  Designs
(b) the reproduction is in the course of, or incidental to:
(i) making a product (the non-infringing product), if the 
making of the product did not, or would not, infringe the 
copyright in the artistic work because of the operation 
of this Division; or
(ii) selling or letting for hire the non-infringing product, or 
offering or exposing the non-infringing product for sale 
or hire.
(2) It is not an infringement of copyright in an artistic work to make a 
cast or mould embodying a corresponding design in relation to the 
artistic work, if:
(a) the cast or mould is for the purpose of making products; and
(b) the making of the products would not infringe copyright 
because of the operation of this Division.
  
Works of joint authorship  Division 9
Division 9—Works of joint authorship
78  References to all of joint authors
Subject to this Division, a reference in this Act to the author of a 
work shall, unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, be 
read, in relation to a work of joint authorship, as a reference to all 
the authors of the work.
79  References to any one or more of joint authors
A reference in section 32 to the author of a work is taken to be a 
reference to any one or more of the authors of the work if the work 
is a work of joint authorship.
79A  References to the identity of none of joint authors being 
generally known
A reference in any of the following provisions to the identity of the 
author of a work not being generally known is taken to be a 
reference to the identity of none of the authors of the work being 
generally known if the work is a work of joint authorship:
(a) item 3 of the table in subsection 33(2);
(b) item 2 or 3 of the table in subsection 33(3).
80  References to whichever of joint authors died last
A reference in any of the following provisions to the author of a 
work is taken to be a reference to the author who died last if the 
work is a work of joint authorship to which section 81 does not 
apply:
(a) item 1 or 2 of the table in subsection 33(2);
(b) item 1 of the table in subsection 33(3);
(c) section 51.
  
Division 9  Works of joint authorship
81  Works of joint authorship published under pseudonyms
(1) This section applies to a work of joint authorship that was first 
published under 2 or more names of which one was a pseudonym 
or 2 or more (but not all) were pseudonyms.
(2) This section also applies to a work of joint authorship that was first 
published under 2 or more names all of which were pseudonyms if, 
at any time within 70 years after the end of the calendar year in 
which the work was first published, the identity of one or more 
(but not all) of the authors was generally known.
(3) A reference in any of the provisions mentioned in subsection (3A) 
to the author of the work is taken to be a reference to:
(a) the author whose identity was disclosed; or
(b) if the identity of 2 or more of the authors was disclosed—
whichever of those authors died last.
(3A) The provisions are as follows:
(a) item 1 or 2 of the table in subsection 33(2);
(b) item 1 of the table in subsection 33(3).
(4) For the purposes of this section, the identity of an author shall be 
deemed to have been disclosed if:
(a) one of the names under which the work was published was 
the name of that author; or
(b) the identity of that author is generally known.
82  Copyright to subsist in joint works without regard to any author 
who is an unqualified person
(1) Subsection 35(2) has effect, in relation to a work of joint 
authorship of which one of the authors is an unqualified person, or 
2 or more (but not all) of the authors are unqualified persons, as if 
the author or authors, other than unqualified persons, had alone 
been the author or authors, as the case may be, of the work.
(2) For the purposes of the last preceding subsection, a person is an 
unqualified person in relation to a work where, if he or she had 
  
Works of joint authorship  Division 9
alone been the author of the work, copyright would not have 
subsisted in the work by virtue of this Part.
83  Inclusion of joint works in collections for use in places of 
education
The reference in subsection 44(2) to other extracts from, or from 
adaptations of, works by the author of the extract concerned:
(a) shall be read as including a reference to extracts from, or 
from adaptations of, works by the author of the extract 
concerned in collaboration with any other person; or
(b) if the extract concerned is from, or from an adaptation of, a 
work of joint authorship shall be read as including a 
reference to extracts from, or from adaptations of, works by 
any one or more of the authors of the extract concerned, or by 
any one or more of those authors in collaboration with any 
other person.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
Part IV—Copyright in subject-matter other than 
works
Division 1—Preliminary
84  Definitions
In this Part:
live performance means:
(a) a performance (including an improvisation) of a dramatic 
work, or part of such a work, including such a performance 
given with the use of puppets; or
(b) a performance (including an improvisation) of a musical 
work or part of such a work; or
(c) the reading, recitation or delivery of a literary work, or part 
of such a work, or the recitation or delivery of an improvised 
literary work; or
(d) a performance of a dance; or
(e) a performance of a circus act or a variety act or any similar 
presentation or show; or
(f) a performance of an expression of folklore;
being a live performance, whether in the presence of an audience 
or otherwise.
performer in a live performance:
(a) means each person who contributed to the sounds of the 
performance; and
(b) if the performance includes a performance of a musical 
work—includes the conductor.
qualified person means:
(a) an Australian citizen or a person (other than a body 
corporate) resident in Australia; or
  
Preliminary  Division 1
(b) a body corporate incorporated under a law of the 
Commonwealth or of a State.
sound recording of a live performance means a sound recording, 
made at the time of the live performance, consisting of, or 
including, the sounds of the performance.
  
Division 2  Nature of copyright in subject-matter other than works
Division 2—Nature of copyright in subject-matter other 
than works
85  Nature of copyright in sound recordings
(1) For the purposes of this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, 
copyright, in relation to a sound recording, is the exclusive right to 
do all or any of the following acts:
(a) to make a copy of the sound recording;
(b) to cause the recording to be heard in public;
(c) to communicate the recording to the public;
(d) to enter into a commercial rental arrangement in respect of 
the recording.
(2) Paragraph (1)(d) does not extend to entry into a commercial rental 
arrangement in respect of a sound recording if:
(a) the copy of the sound recording was purchased by a person 
(the record owner) before the commencement of Part 2 of 
the Copyright (World Trade Organization Amendments) Act 
1994; and
(b) the commercial rental arrangement is entered into in the 
ordinary course of a business conducted by the record owner; 
and
(c) the record owner was conducting the same business, or 
another business that consisted of, or included, the making of 
commercial rental arrangements in respect of copies of sound 
recordings, when the copy was purchased.
86  Nature of copyright in cinematograph films
For the purposes of this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, 
copyright, in relation to a cinematograph film, is the exclusive right 
to do all or any of the following acts:
(a) to make a copy of the film;
  
Nature of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 2
(b) to cause the film, in so far as it consists of visual images, to 
be seen in public, or, in so far as it consists of sounds, to be 
heard in public;
(c) to communicate the film to the public.
87  Nature of copyright in television broadcasts and sound 
broadcasts
For the purposes of this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, 
copyright, in relation to a television broadcast or sound broadcast, 
is the exclusive right:
(a) in the case of a television broadcast in so far as it consists of 
visual images—to make a cinematograph film of the 
broadcast, or a copy of such a film;
(b) in the case of a sound broadcast, or of a television broadcast 
in so far as it consists of sounds—to make a sound recording 
of the broadcast, or a copy of such a sound recording; and
(c) in the case of a television broadcast or of a sound 
broadcast—to re-broadcast it or communicate it to the public 
otherwise than by broadcasting it.
88  Nature of copyright in published editions of works
For the purposes of this Act, unless the contrary intention appears, 
copyright, in relation to a published edition of a literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work or of two or more literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic works, is the exclusive right to make a facsimile 
copy of the edition.
  
Division 3  Subject-matter, other than works, in which copyright subsists
Division 3—Subject-matter, other than works, in which 
copyright subsists
89  Sound recordings in which copyright subsists
(1) Subject to this Act, copyright subsists in a sound recording of 
which the maker was a qualified person at the time when the 
recording was made.
(2) Without prejudice to the last preceding subsection, copyright 
subsists, subject to this Act, in a sound recording if the recording 
was made in Australia.
(3) Without prejudice to the last two preceding subsections, copyright 
subsists, subject to this Act, in a published sound recording if the 
first publication of the recording took place in Australia.
90  Cinematograph films in which copyright subsists
(1) Subject to this Act, copyright subsists in a cinematograph film of 
which the maker was a qualified person for the whole or a 
substantial part of the period during which the film was made.
(2) Without prejudice to the last preceding subsection, copyright 
subsists, subject to this Act, in a cinematograph film if the film was 
made in Australia.
(3) Without prejudice to the last two preceding subsections, copyright 
subsists, subject to this Act, in a published cinematograph film if 
the first publication of the film took place in Australia.
91  Television broadcasts and sound broadcasts in which copyright 
subsists
Subject to this Act, copyright subsists in a television broadcast or 
sound broadcast made from a place in Australia:
(a) under the authority of a licence or a class licence under the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992; or
  
Subject-matter, other than works, in which copyright subsists  Division 3
(b) by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation or the Special 
Broadcasting Service Corporation.
92  Published editions of works in which copyright subsists
(1) Subject to this Act, copyright subsists in a published edition of a 
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or of 2 or more literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic works, where:
(a) the first publication of the edition took place in Australia; or
(b) the publisher of the edition was a qualified person at the date 
of the first publication of the edition.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply to an edition that 
reproduces a previous edition of the same work or works.
  
Division 4  Duration of copyright in subject-matter other than works
Division 4—Duration of copyright in subject-matter other 
than works
93  Duration of copyright in sound recordings and films
(1) This section applies to copyright that subsists in copyright material 
under this Part, if the material is:
(a) a sound recording; or
(b) a cinematograph film.
Copyright material first made public before 1 January 2019
(2) The copyright continues to subsist until 70 years after the calendar 
year in which the copyright material was first made public if the 
material was first made public before 1 January 2019.
Copyright material never made public, and material first made 
public on or after 1 January 2019
(3) The following table has effect if the copyright material was not 
first made public before 1 January 2019.
Duration of copyright—copyright material not first made public before 
1 January 2019
Item Column 1
If …
Column 2
the copyright continues 
to subsist until …
1 the copyright material is first made public 
before the end of 50 years after the calendar 
year in which the material was made
70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the material was first 
made public.
2 item 1 does not apply 70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the copyright material 
was made.
  
Duration of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 4
95  Duration of copyright in television broadcasts and sound 
broadcasts
(1) Copyright subsisting in a television broadcast or sound broadcast 
by virtue of this Part continues to subsist until the expiration of 50 
years after the expiration of the calendar year in which the 
broadcast was made.
(2) In so far as a television broadcast or sound broadcast is a repetition 
(whether the first or a subsequent repetition) of a previous 
television broadcast or sound broadcast to which section 91 
applies, and is made by broadcasting visual images or sounds 
embodied in any article or thing:
(a) if it is made before the expiration of the period of 50 years 
after the expiration of the calendar year in which the previous 
broadcast was made—any copyright subsisting in it expires 
at the expiration of that period; and
(b) if it is made after the expiration of that period—copyright 
does not subsist in it by virtue of this Part.
96  Duration of copyright in published editions of works
Copyright subsisting in a published edition of a work or works 
by virtue of this Part continues to subsist until the expiration of 25 
years after the expiration of the calendar year in which the edition 
was first published.
  
Division 5  Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works
Division 5—Ownership of copyright in subject-matter 
other than works
Subdivision A—Ownership of copyright in subject-matter 
other than works
97  Ownership of copyright in sound recordings
(1) This section has effect subject to Parts VII and X.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the maker of a sound recording is the 
owner of any copyright subsisting in the recording by virtue of this 
Part.
(2A) If there is more than one owner of the copyright in a sound 
recording of a live performance, the owners own the copyright as 
tenants in common in equal shares.
(3) Where:
(a) a person makes, for valuable consideration, an agreement 
with another person for the making of a sound recording by 
the other person; and
(b) the recording is made in pursuance of the agreement;
the first-mentioned person is, in the absence of any agreement to 
the contrary, the owner of any copyright subsisting in the recording 
by virtue of this Part.
98  Ownership of copyright in cinematograph films
(1) This section has effect subject to Parts VII and X.
(2) Subject to the next succeeding subsection, the maker of a 
cinematograph film is the owner of any copyright subsisting in the 
film by virtue of this Part.
(3) Where:
  
Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 5
(a) a person makes, for valuable consideration, an agreement 
with another person for the making of a cinematograph film 
by the other person; and
(b) the film is made in pursuance of the agreement;
the first-mentioned person is, in the absence of any agreement to 
the contrary, the owner of any copyright subsisting in the film by 
virtue of this Part.
(4) If the film is not a commissioned film, then the reference in 
subsection (2) to the maker of the film includes a reference to each 
director of the film.
(5) If a director directed the film under the terms of his or her 
employment under a contract of service or apprenticeship with 
another person (the employer), then, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, the employer is to be substituted for the 
director for the purposes of subsection (4).
(6) If a person becomes an owner of the copyright:
(a) because of the operation of subsection (4); or
(b) because of the operation of subsections (4) and (5);
then the person becomes the owner of the copyright only so far as 
the copyright consists of the right to include the film in a 
retransmission of a free-to-air broadcast.
(7) In this section:
commissioned film means a film made as mentioned in 
paragraphs (3)(a) and (b).
director has the same meaning as in Part IX.
retransmission means a retransmission (as defined in section 10) 
to which Part VC applies.
  
Division 5  Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works
99  Ownership of copyright in television broadcasts and sound 
broadcasts
Subject to Parts VII and X, the maker of a television broadcast or 
sound broadcast is the owner of any copyright subsisting in the 
broadcast.
100  Ownership of copyright in published editions of works
Subject to Parts VII and X, the publisher of an edition of a work or 
works is the owner of any copyright subsisting in the edition by 
virtue of this Part.
Subdivision B—Specific provisions relating to the ownership of 
copyright in pre-commencement sound recordings of 
live performances
100AA  Application
This Subdivision applies to a sound recording of a live 
performance if:
(a) copyright subsists in the recording on the day on which this 
section commences; and
(b) at least one person would become a maker of the recording 
under paragraph 100AD(1)(b) or subsection 100AD(2).
100AB  Definitions
In this Subdivision:
former owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance means a person mentioned in paragraph 100AD(1)(a).
new owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance means the following people:
(a) a person who becomes a maker of a sound recording under 
paragraph 100AD(1)(b);
  
Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 5
(b) if subsection 100AD(2) applies—an employer who becomes 
a maker of a sound recording under that subsection.
Note: Other expressions used in this Subdivision are defined in section 84.
100AC  Application of sections 100AD and 100AE
Sections 100AD and 100AE have effect subject to Parts VII and X.
100AD  Makers of pre-commencement sound recordings of live 
performances
(1) For the purpose of section 100AE, the makers of a sound recording 
of a live performance are:
(a) the person or persons who, immediately before the 
commencement of this section, owned the copyright 
subsisting in the recording; and
(b) the performer or performers who performed in the 
performance (other than a performer who is already covered 
by paragraph (a)).
Employer may be a maker of the sound recording
(2) If:
(a) a sound recording of a live performance was made; and
(b) a performer performed in that performance under the terms of 
his or her employment by another person (the employer) 
under a contract of service or apprenticeship;
then, for the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the employer is taken to 
be a maker instead of that performer.
(3) Subsection (2) may be excluded or modified by an agreement 
(whether made before or after the live performance) between the 
performer and the employer.
  
Division 5  Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works
100AE  Ownership of pre-commencement copyright in sound 
recordings of live performances
Ownership of the copyright
(1) On and after the day on which this section commences, all makers 
of a sound recording of a live performance are owners of any 
copyright subsisting in the recording by virtue of this Part.
Division of the ownership of the copyright
(2) The former owners of the copyright and the new owners of the 
copyright each own half of the copyright as tenants in common in 2 
equal shares.
(3) The former owners own their half of the copyright in the same 
proportions as the whole copyright was owned by them 
immediately before the commencement of this section.
(4) The new owners own their half of the copyright as tenants in 
common in equal shares.
(5) Subsections (3) and (4) do not limit section 196.
(6) Subsection (3) does not otherwise affect the terms on which the 
former owners own their half of the copyright.
Copyright to devolve if a new owner is not alive
(7) If a new owner is not alive on the day on which this section 
commences, then, for the purposes of subsections (2) and (4), that 
owner is replaced by the person to whom the copyright would have 
devolved if the new owner had owned the copyright immediately 
before his or her death. If the copyright would have devolved to 
more than one person, those persons are to be treated as a single 
new owner for the purposes of subsections (2) and (4).
  
Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 5
100AF  Former owners may continue to do any act in relation to the 
copyright
(1) On and after the day on which this section commences, a former 
owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live performance 
may:
(a) do an act comprised in the copyright; or
(b) do any other act in relation to the copyright;
as if each new owner of the copyright had granted a licence or 
permission (however described) to the former owner to do the act.
Note: However, the former owner may still need to obtain the consent of 
other former owners of the copyright before doing the act.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to:
(a) the former owner’s licensees and successors in title; and
(b) any persons who are authorised by the former owner; and
(c) any persons who are authorised by the former owner’s 
licensees or successors in title;
in the same way as it applies to the former owner.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) may be excluded or modified by an 
agreement (whether made before or after this section commences) 
between the former owner and a new owner.
100AG  Actions by new owners of copyright
If a new owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance brings an action under this Act in respect of the 
copyright, the new owner is not entitled to the remedies listed in 
the table.
Actions under this Act
Item In this case... the new owner is not entitled to:
1 the action is for an infringement of 
the copyright under section 115
(a) damages (other than additional 
damages); or
(b) an account of profits
  
Division 5  Ownership of copyright in subject-matter other than works
Actions under this Act
Item In this case... the new owner is not entitled to:
2 the action is for conversion or 
detention under section 116
(a) damages (other than additional 
damages); or
(b) an account of profits; or
(c) any other pecuniary remedy 
(other than costs); or
(d) delivery up of an infringing copy
2A the action is brought under 
section 116AN, 116AO or 116AP
(a) damages (other than additional 
damages); or
(b) an account of profits; or
(c) destruction or delivery up of a 
circumvention device
3 the action is brought under 
section 116B or 116C
(a) damages (other than additional 
damages); or
(b) an account of profits
100AH  References to the owner of the copyright in a sound 
recording
A new owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance is taken not to be the owner of the copyright for the 
purposes of the following provisions:
(a) sections 107, 108 and 109 (in Part IV);
(b) sections 119 and 133 (in Part V);
(c) the definitions of licence and licensor in subsection 136(1), 
and sections 150, 151, 152, 153E, 153F, 153G, 159 and 163A 
(in Part VI);
(d) section 183 (in Part VII).
Note: A new owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance is not an eligible rights holder under 
subsection 113V(9), nor a relevant copyright owner under 
section 135ZZI or 135ZZZF.
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
Division 6—Infringement of copyright in subject-matter 
other than works
100A  Interpretation
In this Division, audio-visual item means a sound recording, a 
cinematograph film, a sound broadcast or a television broadcast.
101  Infringement by doing acts comprised in copyright
(1) Subject to this Act, a copyright subsisting by virtue of this Part is 
infringed by a person who, not being the owner of the copyright, 
and without the licence of the owner of the copyright, does in 
Australia, or authorizes the doing in Australia of, any act 
comprised in the copyright.
(1A) In determining, for the purposes of subsection (1), whether or not a 
person has authorised the doing in Australia of any act comprised 
in a copyright subsisting by virtue of this Part without the licence 
of the owner of the copyright, the matters that must be taken into 
account include the following:
(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing 
of the act concerned;
(b) the nature of any relationship existing between the person 
and the person who did the act concerned;
(c) whether the person took any other reasonable steps to prevent 
or avoid the doing of the act, including whether the person 
complied with any relevant industry codes of practice.
(2) The next two succeeding sections do not affect the generality of the 
last preceding subsection.
(3) Subsection (1) applies in relation to an act done in relation to a 
sound recording whether the act is done by directly or indirectly 
making use of a record embodying the recording.
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(4) Subsection (1) applies in relation to an act done in relation to a 
television broadcast or a sound broadcast whether the act is done 
by the reception of the broadcast or by making use of any article or 
thing in which the visual images and sounds comprised in the 
broadcast have been embodied.
102  Infringement by importation for sale or hire
(1) Subject to sections 112A, 112C, 112D and 112DA, a copyright 
subsisting by virtue of this Part is infringed by a person who, 
without the licence of the owner of the copyright, imports an article 
into Australia for the purpose of:
(a) selling, letting for hire, or by way of trade offering or 
exposing for sale or hire, the article;
(b) distributing the article:
(i) for the purpose of trade; or
(ii) for any other purpose to an extent that will affect 
prejudicially the owner of the copyright; or
(c) by way of trade exhibiting the article in public;
if the importer knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
making of the article would, if the article had been made in 
Australia by the importer, have constituted an infringement of the 
copyright.
(2) In relation to an accessory to an article that is or includes a copy of 
subject-matter in which copyright subsists by virtue of this Part, 
being a copy that was made without the licence of the owner of the 
copyright in the country in which the copy was made, 
subsection (1) has effect as if the words “the importer knew, or 
ought reasonably to have known, that” were omitted.
103  Infringement by sale and other dealings
(1) Subject to sections 112A, 112C, 112D and 112DA, a copyright 
subsisting by virtue of this Part is infringed by a person who, in 
Australia, and without the licence of the owner of the copyright:
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
(a) sells, lets for hire, or by way of trade offers or exposes for 
sale or hire, an article; or
(b) by way of trade exhibits an article in public;
if the person knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
making of the article constituted an infringement of the copyright 
or, in the case of an imported article, would, if the article had been 
made in Australia by the importer, have constituted an 
infringement of the copyright.
(2) For the purposes of the last preceding subsection, the distribution 
of any articles:
(a) for the purpose of trade; or
(b) for any other purpose to an extent that affects prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright concerned;
shall be taken to be the sale of those articles.
(3) In this section:
article includes a reproduction or copy of a work or other 
subject-matter, being a reproduction or copy in electronic form.
103A  Fair dealing for purpose of criticism or review
A fair dealing with an audio-visual item does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the item or in any work or other 
audio-visual item included in the item if it is for the purpose of 
criticism or review, whether of the first-mentioned audio-visual 
item, another audio-visual item or a work, and a sufficient 
acknowledgement of the first-mentioned audio-visual item is made.
103AA  Fair dealing for purpose of parody or satire
A fair dealing with an audio-visual item does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the item or in any work or other 
audio-visual item included in the item if it is for the purpose of 
parody or satire.
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
103B  Fair dealing for purpose of reporting news
(1) A fair dealing with an audio-visual item does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the item or in any work or other 
audio-visual item included in the item if:
(a) it is for the purpose of, or is associated with, the reporting of 
news in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical and a 
sufficient acknowledgement of the first-mentioned 
audio-visual item is made; or
(b) it is for the purpose of, or is associated with, the reporting of 
news by means of a communication or in a cinematograph 
film.
103C  Fair dealing for purpose of research or study
(1) A fair dealing with an audio-visual item does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the item or in any work or other 
audio-visual item included in the item if it is for the purpose of 
research or study.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the matters to which regard shall be 
had in determining whether a dealing with an audio-visual item 
constitutes a fair dealing for the purpose of research or study 
include:
(a) the purpose and character of the dealing;
(b) the nature of the audio-visual item;
(c) the possibility of obtaining the audio-visual item within a 
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price;
(d) the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or 
value of, the audio-visual item; and
(e) in a case where part only of the audio-visual item is 
copied—the amount and substantiality of the part copied 
taken in relation to the whole item.
104  Acts done for purposes of judicial proceeding
A copyright subsisting by virtue of this Part is not infringed by 
anything done:
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
(a) for the purpose of a judicial proceeding or a report of a 
judicial proceeding; or
(b) for the purpose of seeking professional advice from:
(i) a legal practitioner; or
(ii) a person registered as a patent attorney under the 
Patents Act 1990; or
(iii) a person registered as a trade marks attorney under the 
Trade Marks Act 1995; or
(c) for the purpose of, or in the course of, the giving of 
professional advice by:
(i) a legal practitioner; or
(ii) a person registered as a patent attorney under the 
Patents Act 1990; or
(iii) a person registered as a trade marks attorney under the 
Trade Marks Act 1995.
104A  Acts done by Parliamentary libraries for members of 
Parliament
A copyright subsisting by virtue of this Part is not infringed by 
anything done, for the sole purpose of assisting a person who is a 
member of a Parliament in the performance of the person’s duties 
as such a member, by an authorized officer of a library, being a 
library the principal purpose of which is to provide library services 
for members of that Parliament.
104B  Infringing copies made on machines installed in libraries and 
archives
If:
(a) a person makes an infringing copy of, or of part of, an 
audio-visual item or a published edition of a work on a 
machine (including a computer), being a machine installed 
by or with the approval of the body administering a library or 
archives on the premises of the library or archives, or outside 
those premises for the convenience of persons using the 
library or archives; and
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(b) there is affixed to, or in close proximity to, the machine, in a 
place readily visible to persons using the machine, a notice of 
the prescribed dimensions and in accordance with the 
prescribed form;
neither the body administering the library or archives, nor the 
officer in charge of the library or archives, is taken to have 
authorised the making of the infringing copy merely because the 
copy was made on that machine.
104C  Copyright subsisting in sound recordings and cinematograph 
films shared for healthcare or related purposes
(1) The copyright in a cinematograph film or a sound recording is not 
infringed by an act comprised in the copyright in the film or 
recording if:
(a)  the act is done, or authorised to be done:
(i) for a purpose for which the collection, use or disclosure 
of health information is required or authorised under the 
My Health Records Act 2012; or
(ii) in circumstances in which a permitted general situation 
exists under item 1 of the table in subsection 16A(1) of 
the Privacy Act 1988 (serious threat to life, health or 
safety), or would exist if the entity doing the thing were 
an APP entity for the purposes of that Act; or
(iii) in circumstances in which a permitted health situation 
exists under section 16B of the Privacy Act 1988, or 
would exist if the entity doing the thing were an 
organisation for the purposes of that Act; or
(iv) for any other purpose relating to healthcare, or the 
communication or management of health information, 
prescribed by the regulations; and
(b) either:
(i) the film or recording is substantially comprised of 
health information; or
(ii) the film or recording allows for the storage, retrieval or 
use of health information and it is reasonably necessary 
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
to do the act, or authorise it to be done, in circumstances 
that would otherwise infringe copyright in the work.
(2) In this section:
healthcare has the same meaning as in the My Health Records Act 
2012.
health information has the same meaning as in the My Health 
Records Act 2012.
105  Copyright in certain recordings not infringed by causing 
recordings to be heard in public or broadcast
Copyright subsisting in a sound recording by virtue only of 
subsection 89(3) is not infringed by the causing of the recording to 
be heard in public or by the broadcasting of the recording.
106  Causing sound recording to be heard at guest house or club
(1) Where a sound recording is caused to be heard in public:
(a) at premises where persons reside or sleep, as part of the 
amenities provided exclusively for residents or inmates of the 
premises or for those residents or inmates and their guests; or
(b) as part of the activities of, or for the benefit of, a registered 
charity;
the act of causing the recording to be so heard does not constitute 
an infringement of the copyright in the recording.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply:
(a) in relation to premises of a kind referred to in paragraph (a) 
of that subsection, if a specific charge is made for admission 
to the part of the premises where the recording is to be heard; 
or
(b) in relation to a registered charity of a kind referred to in 
paragraph (b) of that subsection, if a charge is made for 
admission to the place where the recording is to be heard and 
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
any of the proceeds of the charge are applied otherwise than 
for the purposes of the registered charity.
(3) A reference in the last preceding subsection to a specific charge, or 
a charge, made for admission includes a reference to a specific 
charge, or a charge, made partly for admission and partly for other 
purposes.
107  Making of a copy of the sound recording for purpose of 
broadcasting
(1) Where the broadcasting by a person of a sound recording would 
not (whether by reason of an assignment or licence or of the 
operation of a provision of this Act) constitute an infringement of 
the copyright in the recording but the making by the person of a 
copy of the sound recording would, apart from this subsection, 
constitute such an infringement, the copyright in the recording is 
not infringed by the making by the person of a copy of the sound 
recording in association with other matter solely for the purpose of 
the broadcasting of the recording in association with the other 
matter.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to a copy 
of a sound recording if the copy is used for a purpose other than:
(a) the broadcasting of the recording in circumstances that do not 
(whether by reason of an assignment or licence or of the 
operation of a provision of this Act) constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the recording; or
(b) the making of further copies of the sound recording for the 
purpose of the broadcasting of the recording in such 
circumstances.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a copy of a sound 
recording where the copy is used for the purpose of the 
broadcasting of the recording by a person who is not the maker of 
the copy unless the maker has paid to the owner of the copyright in 
the recording such amount as they agree or, in default of 
agreement, has given an undertaking in writing to the owner to pay 
to the owner such amount as is determined by the Copyright 
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
Tribunal, on the application of either of them, to be equitable 
remuneration to the owner for the making of the copy.
(4) A person who has given an undertaking referred to in the last 
preceding subsection is liable, when the Copyright Tribunal has 
determined the amount to which the undertaking relates, to pay that 
amount to the owner of the copyright in the recording and the 
owner may recover that amount in a court of competent jurisdiction 
from the person as a debt due to the owner.
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a copy of a sound 
recording unless, before the expiration of the period of 12 months 
commencing on the day on which any of the copies made in 
accordance with that subsection is first used for broadcasting the 
recording in accordance with that subsection, or before the 
expiration of such further period, if any, as is agreed between the 
maker of the copy and the owner of the copyright in the recording, 
all the copies made in accordance with that subsection are 
destroyed or are transferred, with the consent of the 
Director-General of the National Archives of Australia, to the care 
(within the meaning of the Archives Act 1983) of the National 
Archives of Australia.
(6) The Director-General of the National Archives of Australia must 
not consent to the transfer to the care of the National Archives of 
Australia in accordance with subsection (5) of a copy of a sound 
recording unless he or she has certified that the recording is of an 
exceptional documentary character.
(7) In this section:
broadcasting does not include simulcasting.
108  Copyright in published recording not infringed by public 
performance if equitable remuneration paid
(1) The copyright in a sound recording that has been published is not 
infringed by a person who causes the recording to be heard in 
public if:
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(a) the person has paid to the owner of the copyright in the 
recording such amount as they agree or, in default of 
agreement, has given an undertaking in writing to the owner 
to pay to the owner such amount as is determined by the 
Copyright Tribunal, on the application of either of them, to 
be equitable remuneration to the owner for the causing of the 
recording to be heard in public; and
(b) in the case of a recording that was first published outside 
Australia—the recording has been published in Australia or 
the prescribed period after the date of the first publication of 
the recording has expired.
(2) A person who has given an undertaking referred to in the last 
preceding subsection is liable, when the Copyright Tribunal has 
determined the amount to which the undertaking relates, to pay that 
amount to the owner of the copyright in the recording and the 
owner may recover that amount in a court of competent jurisdiction 
from the person as a debt due to the owner.
(3) Regulations prescribing a period for the purposes of 
paragraph (1)(b) may prescribe different periods in relation to 
different classes of sound recordings.
109  Copyright in published sound recording not infringed by 
broadcast in certain circumstances
(1) Subject to this section, the copyright in a published sound 
recording is not infringed by the making of a broadcast (other than 
a broadcast transmitted for a fee payable to the person who made 
the broadcast) of that recording if:
(a) where there is no order of the Tribunal in force under 
section 152 applying to the maker of that broadcast in 
relation to the time when that broadcast was made—the 
maker of that broadcast has given an undertaking in writing 
to the person who is the owner of the copyright in that 
recording to pay to the owner such amounts (if any) as may 
be specified in, or determined in accordance with, an order of 
the Tribunal made under that section in respect of the 
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
broadcasting by the maker, during a period within which that 
broadcast was made, of published sound recordings in which 
the copyrights are owned by that person and which include 
that recording; or
(b) where there is an order of the Tribunal in force under that 
section applying to the maker of that broadcast in relation to 
the time when that broadcast was made:
(i) the copyright in that recording is owned by a person 
who is specified in the order as one of the persons 
among whom the amount specified in, or determined in 
accordance with, the order is to be divided and the 
maker of the broadcast makes payments to the person in 
accordance with the order; or
(ii) the copyright in that recording is owned by a person 
who is not so specified in the order.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to a 
broadcast of a sound recording if the broadcast was made in 
accordance with an agreement between the maker of the broadcast 
and the owner of the copyright in the recording.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a broadcast of a sound 
recording that has not been published in Australia if the broadcast 
was made before the expiration of the prescribed period after the 
date of the first publication of the recording.
(4) Regulations prescribing a period for the purposes of the last 
preceding subsection may prescribe different periods in relation to 
different classes of sound recordings.
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a broadcast of a sound 
recording that has not been published in Australia if:
(a) the recording consists of, or includes, a musical work in 
which copyright subsists;
(b) the musical work was made for the purpose of being 
performed, or has been performed, in association with a 
dramatic work or has been included in a cinematograph film; 
and
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(c) records of the musical work have not been supplied (whether 
by sale or otherwise) to the public in Australia.
(6) For the purposes of paragraph (5)(c), a supplying of records of a 
musical work shall be disregarded if the supplying was done 
otherwise than by, or with the licence of, the owner of the 
copyright in the work.
109A  Copying sound recordings for private and domestic use
(1) This section applies if:
(a) the owner of a copy (the earlier copy) of a sound recording 
makes another copy (the later copy) of the sound recording 
using the earlier copy; and
(b) the sole purpose of making the later copy is the owner’s 
private and domestic use of the later copy with a device that:
(i) is a device that can be used to cause sound recordings to 
be heard; and
(ii) he or she owns; and
(c) the earlier copy was not made by downloading over the 
internet a digital recording of a radio broadcast or similar 
program; and
(d) the earlier copy is not an infringing copy of the sound 
recording, a broadcast or a literary, dramatic or musical work 
included in the sound recording.
(2) The making of the later copy does not infringe copyright in the 
sound recording, or in a literary, dramatic or musical work or other 
subject-matter included in the sound recording.
(3) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the earlier copy or 
the later copy is:
(a) sold; or
(b) let for hire; or
(c) by way of trade offered or exposed for sale or hire; or
(d) distributed for the purpose of trade or otherwise; or
(e) used for causing the sound recording to be heard in public; or
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
(f) used for broadcasting the sound recording.
Note: If the earlier or later copy is dealt with as described in subsection (3), 
then copyright may be infringed not only by the making of the later 
copy but also by a dealing with the later copy.
(4) To avoid doubt, paragraph (3)(d) does not apply to a loan of the 
earlier copy or the later copy by the lender to a member of the 
lender’s family or household for the member’s private and 
domestic use.
110  Provisions relating to cinematograph films
(1) Where the visual images forming part of a cinematograph film 
consist wholly or principally of images that, at the time when they 
were first embodied in an article or thing, were means of 
communicating news, the copyright in the film is not infringed by 
the causing of the film to be seen or heard, or to be both seen and 
heard, in public after the expiration of 50 years after the expiration 
of the calendar year in which the principal events depicted in the 
film occurred.
(2) Where, by virtue of this Part, copyright has subsisted in a 
cinematograph film, a person who, after that copyright has expired, 
causes the film to be seen or heard, or to be seen and heard, in 
public does not, by so doing, infringe any copyright subsisting by 
virtue of Part III in a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work.
(3) Where the sounds that are embodied in a sound-track associated 
with the visual images forming part of a cinematograph film are 
also embodied in a record, other than such a sound-track or a 
record derived directly or indirectly from such a sound-track, the 
copyright in the cinematograph film is not infringed by any use 
made of that record.
110AA  Copying cinematograph film in different format for private 
use
(1) This section applies if:
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(a) the owner of videotape embodying a cinematograph film in 
analog form makes a copy (the main copy) of the film in 
electronic form for his or her private and domestic use 
instead of the videotape; and
(b) the videotape itself is not an infringing copy of the film or of 
a broadcast, sound recording, work or published edition of a 
work; and
(c) at the time the owner makes the main copy, he or she has not 
made, and is not making, another copy that embodies the film 
in an electronic form substantially identical to the electronic 
form in which the film is embodied in the main copy.
For this purpose, disregard a temporary copy of the film 
incidentally made as a necessary part of the technical process of 
making the main copy.
(2) The making of the main copy is not an infringement of copyright in 
the cinematograph film or in a work or other subject-matter 
included in the film.
Dealing with main copy may make it an infringing copy
(3) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the main copy is:
(a) sold; or
(b) let for hire; or
(c) by way of trade offered or exposed for sale or hire; or
(d) distributed for the purpose of trade or otherwise.
Note: If the main copy is dealt with as described in subsection (3), then 
copyright may be infringed not only by the making of the main copy 
but also by the dealing with the main copy.
(4) To avoid doubt, paragraph (3)(d) does not apply to a loan of the 
main copy by the lender to a member of the lender’s family or 
household for the member’s private and domestic use.
Disposal of videotape may make the main copy an infringing copy
(5) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if the owner of the 
videotape disposes of it to another person.
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
Status of temporary copy
(6) If subsection (2) applies to the making of the main copy only as a 
result of disregarding the incidental making of a temporary copy of 
the film as a necessary part of the technical process of making the 
main copy, then:
(a) if the temporary copy is destroyed at the first practicable time 
during or after the making of the main copy—the making of 
the temporary copy does not infringe copyright in the film or 
in any work or other subject-matter included in the film; or
(b) if the temporary copy is not destroyed at that time—the 
making of the temporary copy is taken always to have 
infringed copyright (if any) subsisting in the film and in any 
work or other subject-matter included in the film.
110A  Copying and communicating unpublished sound recordings 
and cinematograph films in libraries or archives
Where, at a time more than 50 years after the time at which, or the 
expiration of the period during which, a sound recording or 
cinematograph film was made, copyright subsists in the sound 
recording or cinematograph film but:
(a) the sound recording or cinematograph film has not been 
published; and
(b) a record embodying the sound recording, or a copy of the 
cinematograph film, is kept in the collection of a library or 
archives where it is, subject to any regulations governing that 
collection, accessible to the public;
the copyright in the sound recording or cinematograph film and in 
any work or other subject-matter included in the sound recording 
or cinematograph film is not infringed:
(c) by the making of a copy or the communication of the sound 
recording or cinematograph film by a person for the purpose 
of research or study or with a view to publication; or
(d) by the making of a copy or the communication of the sound 
recording or cinematograph film by, or on behalf of, the 
officer in charge of the library or archives if the copy is 
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
supplied or communicated to a person who satisfies the 
officer that he or she requires the copy for the purpose of 
research or study, or with a view to publication and that he or 
she will not use it for any other purpose.
110C  Making of a copy of a sound recording or cinematograph film 
for the purpose of simulcasting
(1) If the broadcasting of a sound recording or a cinematograph film 
would not for any reason constitute an infringement of the 
copyright in the recording or film, but the making of a copy of the 
recording or film would, apart from this section, constitute an 
infringement of the copyright, the copyright is not infringed by the 
making of a copy of the recording or film if:
(a) the recording or film from which the copy is made is in 
analog form; and
(b) the copy is made solely for the purpose of simulcasting the 
recording or film in digital form.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a copy of a recording 
or film if the copy is used for a purpose other than:
(a) the simulcasting of the recording or film in circumstances 
that do not for any reason constitute an infringement of the 
copyright in the recording or film; or
(b) the making of further copies of the recording or film for the 
purpose of simulcasting the recording or film in such 
circumstances.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to a copy of a recording 
or film unless all copies of the recording or film made under that 
subsection are destroyed on or before the relevant date specified in 
the regulations.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), the regulations may specify 
different dates in relation to different classes of sound recordings 
or cinematograph films.
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
111  Recording broadcasts for replaying at more convenient time
(1) This section applies if a person makes a cinematograph film or 
sound recording of a broadcast solely for private and domestic use 
by watching or listening to the material broadcast at a time more 
convenient than the time when the broadcast is made.
Note: Subsection 10(1) defines broadcast as a communication to the public 
delivered by a broadcasting service within the meaning of the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992.
Making the film or recording does not infringe copyright
(2) The making of the film or recording does not infringe copyright in 
the broadcast or in any work or other subject-matter included in the 
broadcast.
Note: Even though the making of the film or recording does not infringe that 
copyright, that copyright may be infringed if a copy of the film or 
recording is made.
Dealing with embodiment of film or recording
(3) Subsection (2) is taken never to have applied if an article or thing 
embodying the film or recording is:
(a) sold; or
(b) let for hire; or
(c) by way of trade offered or exposed for sale or hire; or
(d) distributed for the purpose of trade or otherwise; or
(e) used for causing the film or recording to be seen or heard in 
public; or
(f) used for broadcasting the film or recording.
Note: If the article or thing embodying the film or recording is dealt with as 
described in subsection (3), then copyright may be infringed not only 
by the making of the article or thing but also by the dealing with the 
article or thing.
(4) To avoid doubt, paragraph (3)(d) does not apply to a loan of the 
article or thing by the lender to a member of the lender’s family or 
household for the member’s private and domestic use.
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
111A  Temporary copy made in the course of communication
(1) A copyright subsisting under this Part is not infringed by making a 
temporary copy of an audio-visual item as part of the technical 
process of making or receiving a communication.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to the making of a 
temporary copy of an audio-visual item as part of the technical 
process of making a communication if the making of the 
communication is an infringement of copyright.
111B  Temporary copy of subject-matter as part of a technical 
process of use
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the copyright in a subject-matter is not 
infringed by the making of a temporary copy of the subject-matter 
if the temporary copy is incidentally made as a necessary part of a 
technical process of using a copy of the subject-matter.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to:
(a) the making of a temporary copy of a subject-matter if the 
temporary copy is made from:
(i) an infringing copy of the subject-matter; or
(ii) a copy of the subject-matter where the copy is made in 
another country and would be an infringing copy of the 
subject-matter if the person who made the copy had 
done so in Australia; or
(b) the making of a temporary copy of a subject-matter as a 
necessary part of a technical process of using a copy of the 
subject-matter if that use constitutes an infringement of the 
copyright in the subject-matter.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to any subsequent use of a temporary 
copy of a subject-matter other than as a part of the technical 
process in which the temporary copy was made.
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
112  Reproductions of editions of work
The copyright in a published edition of a work or works is not 
infringed by the making of a reproduction of the whole or a part of 
that edition if that reproduction is made in the course of:
(a) where the edition contains one work only:
(i) a dealing with that work, being a dealing that does not, 
by virtue of section 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 or 113E, infringe 
copyright in that work; or
(ii) a use of the whole or a part of that work, being a use 
that, because of section 49, 50, 113F, 113H, 113J, 
113K, 113M, 113P or 182A, does not infringe copyright 
in that work; or
(b) where the edition contains more than one work:
(i) a dealing with one of those works or dealings with some 
or all of those works, being a dealing that does not, or 
dealings that do not, by virtue of section 40, 41, 42, 43, 
44 or 113E, infringe copyright in that work or those 
works; or
(ii) a use of a whole or a part of one of those works, or a use 
of the whole or parts of some or all of those works, 
being a use that, because of section 49, 50, 113F, 113H, 
113J, 113K, 113M, 113P or 182A, does not infringe 
copyright in that work or those works.
112A  Importation and sale etc. of books
(1) The copyright in an overseas edition first published on or after the 
commencing day, is not infringed by a person who, without the 
licence of the owner of the copyright, imports a non-infringing 
book into Australia for a purpose mentioned in 
paragraph 102(1)(a), (b) or (c).
(2) Subject to this section, the copyright in:
(a) an overseas edition first published before the commencing 
day; or
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(b) a published edition of a work, being an edition first published 
in Australia, whether before, on or after the commencing day;
is not infringed by a person who, without the licence of the owner 
of the copyright, imports a copy (in this subsection called the 
imported copy) of a hardback or paperback version of a 
non-infringing book into Australia for a purpose mentioned in 
paragraph 102(1)(a), (b) or (c) if:
(c) the person had ordered in writing from the copyright owner, 
or the owner’s licensee or agent, one or more copies of that 
version of the book (not being second-hand copies or more 
copies than were needed to satisfy the person’s reasonable 
requirements); and
(d) when the person ordered the imported copy, the original 
order mentioned in paragraph (c) had not been withdrawn or 
cancelled by, or with the consent of, the person and:
(i) at least 7 days had elapsed since the person placed the 
original order and the copyright owner, licensee or 
agent had not notified the person in writing that the 
original order would be filled within 90 days after it was 
placed; or
(ii) at least 90 days had elapsed since the person placed the 
original order and the copyright owner, licensee or 
agent had not filled the order.
(3) The copyright in a published edition of a work (whether the edition 
was first published before, on or after the commencing day) is not 
infringed by a person who, without the licence of the owner of the 
copyright, imports a single copy of a non-infringing book into 
Australia if the importation is for the purpose of filling a written 
order, or a verifiable telephone order, by a customer of the person 
and:
(a) in the case of a written order, the order contains a statement, 
signed by the customer; or
(b) in the case of a telephone order, the customer makes a 
verifiable statement;
to the effect that the customer does not intend to use the book for a 
purpose mentioned in paragraph 102(1)(a), (b) or (c).
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
(4) The copyright in a published edition of a work (whether the edition 
was first published before, on or after the commencing day) is not 
infringed by a person who, without the licence of the owner of the 
copyright, imports 2 or more copies of a non-infringing book into 
Australia if:
(a) the importation is for the purpose of filling a written order, or 
a verifiable telephone order, placed with the person by or on 
behalf of a library, other than a library conducted for the 
profit (direct or indirect) of a person or organisation; and
(b) in the case of a written order—the order contains a statement, 
signed by the person placing the order, to the effect that the 
library does not intend to use any of the books for a purpose 
mentioned in paragraph 102(1)(a), (b) or (c); and
(c) in the case of a telephone order—the person placing the order 
makes a verifiable statement to the effect referred to in 
paragraph (b); and
(d) the number of copies so imported is not more than the 
number of copies so ordered.
(5) Without limiting the ways in which a telephone order under 
subsection (3) or (4), or a statement under paragraph (3)(b) or 
(4)(c) relating to such an order, may be verified, such an order or 
statement is, for the purposes of this section, taken to be verifiable 
if the person who takes the order, or to whom the statement is 
made, makes a written note of the details of the order or statement 
when, or immediately after, the order is placed, or the statement is 
made, as the case may be.
(6) Where:
(a) a book is imported into Australia for a purpose mentioned in 
paragraph 102(1)(a), (b) or (c); and
(b) the importation does not, under this section, constitute an 
infringement of copyright in a published edition of a work;
the use of the book for any such purpose does not constitute an 
infringement of the copyright in the edition and subsection 103(1) 
does not apply to the book.
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
(7) Subsection (2) does not apply to the importation of a copy of a 
hardback version of a non-infringing book into Australia if the 
copyright owner, or his or her licensee or agent, is able to supply in 
Australia enough copies of a paperback version of the book to fill 
any reasonable order.
(8) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(d), a copyright owner, licensee 
or agent is not taken to have filled an order by a person for one or 
more copies of a version of a book unless and until the copyright 
owner, licensee or agent sends the copy, or all of the copies, as the 
case requires, to the person.
(9) In this section:
book does not include:
(a) a book whose main content is one or more musical works, 
with or without any related literary, dramatic or artistic work; 
or
(b) a manual sold with computer software for use in connection 
with that software; or
(c) a periodical publication.
commencing day means the day on which the Copyright 
Amendment Act 1991 commences.
overseas edition means a published edition of a work, being an 
edition:
(a) that was first published in a country other than Australia; and
(b) that was not published in Australia within 30 days after its 
first publication in that other country.
Note: An edition of a work may, for the purposes of this Act, be first 
published in Australia if it is published in Australia within 30 days of 
an earlier publication elsewhere. For the meaning of first publication, 
see section 29 and, in particular, subsection 29(5).
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
112B  Reproduction of writing on approved label for containers for 
chemical product
The reproduction on a label on a container for a chemical product 
of any writing appearing on an approved label is not an 
infringement of any copyright subsisting under section 92 in 
relation to that writing.
112C  Copyright subsisting in accessories etc. to imported articles
(1) The copyright in:
(a) a published edition of a work a reproduction of which is on, 
or embodied in, a non-infringing accessory to an article; or
(b) a cinematograph film a copy of which is a non-infringing 
accessory to an article; or
(c) a sound recording a record of which is a non-infringing 
accessory to an article;
is not infringed by importing the accessory with the article.
Note: See the definition of accessory in subsection 10(1) and see also 
section 10AD for an expanded meaning of accessory in relation to 
certain imported articles.
(2) Section 103 does not apply to:
(a) a reproduction of a published edition of a work, being a 
reproduction that is on, or embodied in, a non-infringing 
accessory to an article; or
(b) a copy of a cinematograph film, being a copy that is a 
non-infringing accessory to an article; or
(c) a record embodying a sound recording, being a record that is 
a non-infringing accessory to an article;
if the importation of the accessory is not an infringement of 
copyright in the edition, film or recording, as the case may be.
(3) The definition of article in section 103 does not affect this section.
  
Division 6  Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works
112D  Import of non-infringing copy of a sound recording does not 
infringe copyright in the sound recording
(1) The copyright in a sound recording is not infringed by a person 
who:
(a) imports into Australia a non-infringing copy of the sound 
recording; or
(b) does an act described in section 103 involving an article that 
is a non-infringing copy of the sound recording and has been 
imported into Australia by anyone.
Note: In a civil action for infringement of copyright, a copy of a sound 
recording is presumed not to be a non-infringing copy of the sound 
recording unless the defendant proves it is. See section 130A.
(2) This section applies to a copy of a sound recording only if, when 
the copy is imported into Australia, the sound recording has been 
published:
(a) in Australia; or
(b) in another country (the publication country) by or with the 
consent of:
(i) the owner of the copyright or related right in the sound 
recording in the publication country; or
(ii) the owner of the copyright or related right in the sound 
recording in the country (the original recording 
country) in which the sound recording was made, if the 
law of the publication country did not provide for 
copyright or a related right in sound recordings when 
publication occurred; or
(iii) the maker of the sound recording, if neither the law of 
the publication country nor the law of the original 
recording country (whether those countries are different 
or not) provided for copyright or a related right in sound 
recordings when publication occurred.
Note: Subsection 29(6) deals with unauthorised publication.
(3) In subsection (2):
  
Infringement of copyright in subject-matter other than works  Division 6
owner of the copyright or related right in the sound recording 
means the owner at the time publication of the sound recording 
occurred.
(4) The definition of article in section 103 does not affect this section.
112DA  Importation and sale etc. of copies of electronic literary or 
music items
(1) If, in relation to a published edition of a work:
(a) the work is, or is part of, an electronic literary or music item; 
and
(b) the edition has been published in Australia or a qualifying 
country;
then the copyright in the published edition is not infringed by a 
person who:
(c) imports into Australia an article that has embodied in it a 
non-infringing copy of the electronic literary or music item; 
or
(d) does an act mentioned in section 103 involving an article that 
has embodied in it a non-infringing copy of the electronic 
literary or music item and that has been imported into 
Australia by anyone.
Note: Section 130C deals with the burden of proof a defendant bears in a 
civil action for infringement of copyright.
(2) The definition of article in section 103 does not affect this section.
112E  Communication by use of certain facilities
A person (including a carrier or carriage service provider) who 
provides facilities for making, or facilitating the making of, a 
communication is not taken to have authorised any infringement of 
copyright in an audio-visual item merely because another person 
uses the facilities so provided to do something the right to do 
which is included in the copyright.
  
Division 7  Miscellaneous
Division 7—Miscellaneous
113  Copyrights to subsist independently
(1) Subject to subsection 110(2), where copyright subsists in any 
subject-matter by virtue of this Part, nothing in this Part shall be 
taken to affect the operation of Part III in relation to any literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic work from which that subject-matter is 
wholly or partly derived, and any copyright subsisting by virtue of 
this Part is in addition to, and independent of, any copyright 
subsisting by virtue of Part III.
(2) The subsistence of copyright under any provision of this Part does 
not affect the operation of any other provision of this Part under 
which copyright can subsist.
113A  Agents may act on behalf of groups of performers
(1) This section applies in respect of all members of a group of 
performers who have an interest in the copyright in a sound 
recording of a live performance.
(2) All members of the group are taken to have granted a licence or 
permission (however described) to a person:
(a) to do an act comprised in the copyright; or
(b) to do any other act in relation to the copyright;
if an agent of the group, acting within the scope of his or her actual 
or apparent authority, has granted a licence or permission to the 
person to do the act.
Note: The person may still need to obtain the licence or permission of other 
owners of the copyright before doing the act.
113B  Consent to the use of a sound recording of a live performance
A person is taken to have been granted a licence or permission 
(however described) by a performer to use a sound recording of a 
live performance if:
  
Miscellaneous  Division 7
(a) the performer has given his or her consent to recording the 
performance for a particular purpose; and
(b) the recording is used for that purpose in accordance with the 
terms of the consent.
Note: The person may still need to obtain the consent of the other owners of 
the copyright in the sound recording of the live performance before 
using the sound recording.
113C  Use of published sound recordings when owners cannot be 
found etc.
(1) An owner (the first owner) of the copyright in a sound recording of 
a live performance that is a published sound recording is taken to 
have been granted a licence or permission (however described) by 
another owner of the copyright to do an act comprised in the 
copyright, or to do any other act in relation to the copyright, if:
(a) the first owner has entered into an agreement with another 
person to do the act; and
(b) the first owner, after making reasonable inquiries, cannot 
discover the identity or location of the other owner or a 
person representing the other owner.
Note: The first owner may still need to obtain a licence or permission from 
any other owners of the copyright in the sound recording of the live 
performance.
(2) If the first owner does the act, then the first owner must hold the 
other owner’s share of any amount received in respect of it on trust 
for 4 years after the day on which the agreement is entered into 
(unless the amount is distributed to, or on behalf of, the other 
owner before then).
(3) If during the 4 year period, the other owner is identified and 
located, the first owner must distribute the amount held on trust to, 
or on behalf of, the other owner. If at the end of the 4 year period, 
the other owner remains unidentified or is not located, the first 
owner may retain the amount.
  
Division 7  Miscellaneous
(4) After initially making reasonable inquiries, the first owner is not 
required to continue making reasonable inquiries during the 4 year 
period.
(5) The other owner cannot prevent the first owner doing the act 
comprised in the copyright during the term of the agreement if the 
other owner is identified or located.
  
Simplified outline of this Part  Division 1
Part IVA—Uses that do not infringe copyright
Division 1—Simplified outline of this Part
113D  Simplified outline of this Part
The following do not infringe copyright in any copyright material:
(a) certain use by or for persons with a disability;
(b) certain use for the purposes of libraries, archives and 
key cultural institutions;
(c) certain use by educational institutions.
Note 1: Other provisions of this Act, including Parts III, IV, VC, VII and X, 
provide that certain other use of copyright material does not infringe 
copyright.
Note 2: A person may circumvent an access control technological protection 
measure to enable the person to do an act that, under this Part, does not 
infringe copyright (if the act is prescribed by regulations made for the 
purposes of paragraph 116AN(9)(c)).
  
Division 2  Access by or for persons with a disability
Division 2—Access by or for persons with a disability
113E  Fair dealing for purpose of access by persons with a disability
(1) A fair dealing with copyright material does not infringe copyright 
in the material if the dealing is for the purpose of one or more 
persons with a disability having access to copyright material 
(whether the dealing is by any of those persons or by another 
person).
(2) The matters to which regard must be had, in determining whether 
the dealing is a fair dealing for the purposes of this section, include 
the following matters:
(a) the purpose and character of the dealing;
(b) the nature of the copyright material;
(c) the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or 
value of, the material;
(d) if only part of the material is dealt with—the amount and 
substantiality of the part dealt with, taken in relation to the 
whole material.
113F  Use of copyright material by organisations assisting persons 
with a disability
An organisation assisting persons with a disability, or a person 
acting on behalf of such an organisation, does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material by using the material if:
(a) the use is for the sole purpose of assisting one or more 
persons with a disability to access the material in a format 
that the person or persons require because of the disability 
(whether the access is provided by or on behalf of the 
organisation or by another body or person); and
(b) the organisation, or the person acting on behalf of the 
organisation, is satisfied that the material (or a relevant part 
of the material) cannot be obtained in that format within a 
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price.
  
Libraries and archives  Division 3
Division 3—Libraries and archives
Subdivision A—Public libraries, parliamentary libraries and 
archives
113G  Libraries
This Subdivision applies to a library if:
(a) all or part of the collection comprising the library is 
accessible to members of the public directly or through 
interlibrary loans; or
(b) the principal purpose of the library is to provide library 
services for members of a Parliament.
Note 1: For references to a Parliament, see section 12.
Note 2: This Subdivision also applies to archives (within the meaning of 
section 10).
113H  Preservation
(1) An authorized officer of a library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material by using the material if:
(a) the use is for the purpose of preserving the collection 
comprising that or another library or archives; and
(b) either or both of the following subparagraphs apply:
(i) the authorized officer’s library or archives holds the 
material in original form;
(ii) the authorized officer is satisfied that a copy of the 
material cannot be obtained in a version or format that is 
required for that purpose, consistent with best practice 
for preserving such collections.
(2) An authorized officer of a library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material (the preservation copy) by making 
the preservation copy available to be accessed at the library or 
archives if:
  
Division 3  Libraries and archives
(a) subsection (1) applied to the making of the preservation copy 
because it was done for the purpose of preserving the 
collection comprising the library or archives; and
(b) the preservation copy is in electronic form; and
(c) the body administering the library or archives takes 
reasonable steps to ensure that a person who accesses the 
preservation copy at the library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in the preservation copy.
Note: Other uses of the preservation copy might not infringe copyright 
because of other provisions of this Act, such as section 49 
(Reproducing and communicating works by libraries and archives for 
users).
113J  Research
(1) An authorized officer of a library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material by using the material if:
(a) the material forms part of the collection comprising the 
library or archives; and
(b) the library or archives holds the material in original form; 
and
(c) the use is for the purpose of research carried out at that or 
another library or archives.
(2) An authorized officer of a library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material (the research copy) by making the 
research copy available to be accessed at the library or archives if:
(a) subsection (1) applied to the making of the research copy 
because it was done for the purpose of research carried out at 
the library or archives; and
(b) the research copy is in electronic form; and
(c) the body administering the library or archives takes 
reasonable steps to ensure that a person who accesses the 
research copy at the library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in the research copy.
  
Libraries and archives  Division 3
Note: Other uses of the research copy might not infringe copyright because 
of other provisions of this Act, such as section 49 (Reproducing and 
communicating works by libraries and archives for users).
113K  Administration of the collection
An authorized officer of a library or archives does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material by using the material if the use is 
for purposes directly related to the care or control of the collection 
comprising the library or archives.
Subdivision B—Key cultural institutions
113L  Meaning of key cultural institution
A library or archives is a key cultural institution if the body 
administering it:
(a) has, under a law of the Commonwealth or a State or 
Territory, the function of developing and maintaining the 
collection comprising the library or archives; or
(b) is prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this 
paragraph.
113M  Preservation
(1) An authorized officer of a key cultural institution does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material by using the material if:
(a) the material forms part of the collection comprising the key 
cultural institution; and
(b) the authorized officer is satisfied that the material is of 
historical or cultural significance to Australia; and
(c) the use is for the purpose of preserving the material; and
(d) either or both of the following subparagraphs apply:
(i) the key cultural institution holds the material in original 
form;
(ii) the authorized officer is satisfied that a copy of the 
material cannot be obtained in a version or format that is 
  
Division 3  Libraries and archives
required for that purpose, consistent with best practice 
for preserving such copyright material.
Note: If the use of the copyright material does not meet the requirements of 
this subsection, the authorized officer might be able to rely on 
subsection 113H(1) instead.
(2) An authorized officer of a key cultural institution does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material (the preservation copy) by making 
the preservation copy available to be accessed at the key cultural 
institution if:
(a) subsection (1) applied to the making of the preservation copy 
because it was done for the purpose of preserving copyright 
material that formed part of the collection comprising the key 
cultural institution; and
(b) the preservation copy is in electronic form; and
(c) the body administering the key cultural institution takes 
reasonable steps to ensure that a person who accesses the 
preservation copy at the key cultural institution does not 
infringe copyright in the preservation copy.
Note: Other uses of the preservation copy might not infringe copyright 
because of other provisions of this Act, such as section 49 
(Reproducing and communicating works by libraries and archives for 
users).
  
Educational institutions—statutory licence  Division 4
Division 4—Educational institutions—statutory licence
113N  Simplified outline of this Division
An educational institution may copy or communicate certain 
copyright material for educational purposes if the body 
administering the educational institution agrees to pay equitable 
remuneration to a collecting society.
113P  Copying and communicating works and broadcasts
Works
(1) The body administering an educational institution does not infringe 
copyright in a work by copying or communicating the whole or a 
part of the work if:
(a) a remuneration notice that applies to the educational 
institution and the work is in force under section 113Q; and
(b) the work is not:
(i) a computer program; or
(ii) a compilation of computer programs; or
(iii) a work included in a broadcast; or
(iv) a work comprising scheme information within the 
meaning of Part IVE of the Competition and Consumer 
Act 2010 (which provides for a motor vehicle service 
and repair information sharing scheme); and
(c) the copying or communicating occurs solely for the 
educational purposes of:
(i) the educational institution; or
(ii) another educational institution, if a remuneration notice 
that applies to the other educational institution and the 
work is in force under section 113Q; and
  
Division 4  Educational institutions—statutory licence
(d) the amount of the work copied or communicated does not 
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner 
of the copyright; and
(e) the copying or communicating complies with:
(i) any relevant agreement between the relevant works 
collecting society and the body administering the 
educational institution; and
(ii) any relevant determination made by the Copyright 
Tribunal under subsection (4) of this section.
Broadcasts
(2) The body administering an educational institution does not infringe 
copyright in copyright material by copying, or communicating a 
copy of, the whole or a part of a broadcast if:
(a) a remuneration notice that applies to the educational 
institution and the material is in force under section 113Q; 
and
(b) the material is:
(i) the broadcast; or
(ii) a work, sound recording or cinematograph film included 
in the broadcast; and
(c) the copying or communicating occurs solely for the 
educational purposes of:
(i) the educational institution; or
(ii) another educational institution, if a remuneration notice 
that applies to the other educational institution and the 
material is in force under section 113Q; and
(d) the copying or communicating complies with:
(i) any relevant agreement between the broadcasts 
collecting society and the body administering the 
educational institution; and
(ii) any relevant determination made by the Copyright 
Tribunal under subsection (4) of this section.
  
Educational institutions—statutory licence  Division 4
(3) For the purposes of Part XIA, each performer in a performance is 
taken to have authorised the copying, or the communicating a 
copy, of the whole or a part of:
(a) a broadcast of the performance; or
(b) the content of a broadcast of the performance;
if subsection (2) applies to the copying or communicating.
Note: The effect of this subsection is that no right of action and no offence 
occurs, in respect of the copy or communication, under Part XIA 
(Performers’ protection).
Questions determined by Copyright Tribunal
(4) The Copyright Tribunal may determine a question relating to 
copying or communicating mentioned in subsection (1) or (2) if:
(a) the relevant collecting society and the body administering the 
relevant educational institution fail to determine the question 
by agreement under subparagraph (1)(e)(i) or (2)(d)(i); and
(b) the society or the body applies to the Tribunal to have the 
Tribunal determine the question.
Note: Section 153A sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the application.
Copies and communications subsequently used for other purposes
(5) Subsections (1), (2) and (3) do not apply, and are taken never to 
have applied, to copying, or communicating a copy, by a body 
administering an educational institution if the copy is, with the 
consent of the body:
(a) used for a purpose other than the educational purposes of an 
educational institution; or
(b) given to the body administering another educational 
institution, if no remuneration notice that applies to the other 
educational institution and the relevant copyright material is 
in force under section 113Q; or
(c) sold or otherwise supplied for a financial profit.
  
Division 4  Educational institutions—statutory licence
Content of certain broadcasts
(6) This section applies to the content of a broadcast in the same way 
as this section applies to a broadcast if the content of the broadcast 
was:
(a) electronically transmitted using the internet at the same time, 
or at substantially the same time, as the broadcast; or
(b) if the broadcast is a free-to-air broadcast—made available 
online by the broadcaster of the broadcast at the same time 
as, or after, the broadcast.
113Q  Remuneration notices
(1) A remuneration notice is a written notice:
(a) that the body administering an educational institution gives to 
a collecting society; and
(b) by which the body undertakes:
(i) to pay to the society equitable remuneration for licensed 
copying or communicating; and
(ii) to give to the society reasonable assistance to enable the 
society to collect and distribute that equitable 
remuneration.
Note: For equitable remuneration, see section 113R.
(2) Copying or communicating mentioned in subsection 113P(1) or (2) 
is licensed copying or communicating if the copying or 
communicating does not infringe copyright only because of 
section 113P.
(3) A remuneration notice that a body gives to a collecting society 
under this section applies to:
(a) an educational institution that the body administers; and
(b) copyright material for which the society is the collecting 
society.
Note: See paragraph 113V(4)(a).
  
Educational institutions—statutory licence  Division 4
(4) However, the notice does not apply to a work to which 
paragraph 113P(1)(b) applies if the society is not the works 
collecting society for the eligible rights holder who owns the 
copyright in the work.
Note: See paragraph 113V(4)(b).
When remuneration notice is in force
(5) A remuneration notice given under this section:
(a) comes into force on:
(i) the day on which the notice is given to the relevant 
collecting society; or
(ii) a later day specified in the notice; and
(b) remains in force until it is revoked.
(6) The body administering an educational institution may, at any 
time, revoke a remuneration notice the body gave to a collecting 
society under this section. The body revokes the remuneration 
notice by giving notice in writing to the society. The revocation 
takes effect:
(a) at the end of the period of 3 months starting on the day the 
notice of revocation is given to the society; or
(b) on a later day specified in the notice of revocation.
113R  Equitable remuneration
(1) The amount of the equitable remuneration that, by a remuneration 
notice given to a collecting society under section 113Q, the body 
administering an educational institution undertakes to pay for 
licensed copying or communicating is the amount:
(a) agreed between the society and the body; or
(b) determined by the Copyright Tribunal under subsection (2).
(2) The Copyright Tribunal may determine the amount of the equitable 
remuneration if:
(a) the society and the body fail to determine the amount by 
agreement under paragraph (1)(a); and
  
Division 4  Educational institutions—statutory licence
(b) the society or the body apply to the Tribunal to have the 
Tribunal determine the amount.
Note: Section 153A sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the application.
(3) A determination of the Tribunal under subsection (2) may be 
expressed to have effect in relation to copying or communicating 
done before the day on which the determination is made.
113S  Educational institutions must assist collecting society
(1) If a remuneration notice that applies to an educational institution is 
in force under section 113Q, the relevant collecting society may, in 
writing (the entry notice), notify the body administering the 
educational institution that the society wishes, on a day specified in 
the notice, to enter the premises of the educational institution for 
the purpose of reviewing the body’s compliance with:
(a) the remuneration notice; and
(b) any relevant agreements and determinations mentioned in 
paragraph 113P(1)(e) or (2)(d).
(2) A person authorised in writing by the collecting society may enter 
the premises of the educational institution for the purpose 
mentioned in subsection (1) after the collecting society gives the 
entry notice to the body.
(3) Entry onto premises under subsection (2) may only occur:
(a) during ordinary working hours of the educational institution; 
and
(b) on the day specified in the entry notice, which must not be 
earlier than 7 days after the day on which the entry notice is 
given.
(4) The Copyright Tribunal may determine a question relating to entry 
onto premises of an educational institution under this section if:
(a) the relevant collecting society and the body administering the 
educational institution fail to determine the question by 
agreement; and
  
Educational institutions—statutory licence  Division 4
(b) the society or the body applies to the Tribunal to have the 
Tribunal determine the question.
Note: Section 153A sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the application.
(5) The body administering an educational institution must:
(a) ensure that a person who enters the premises of the 
educational institution under subsection (2) is provided with 
all reasonable and necessary facilities and assistance for the 
effective review of the body’s compliance with the 
remuneration notice, agreements and determinations 
mentioned in paragraphs (1)(a) and (b); and
(b) comply with any determinations of the Copyright Tribunal 
made under subsection (4).
(6) A body administering an educational institution commits an 
offence if the body contravenes subsection (5).
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
113T  Voluntary licences
(1) Nothing in this Division affects the right of the owner of the 
copyright in copyright material to grant a licence authorising any 
use of that material by the body administering an educational 
institution.
(2) Nothing in this Division affects the right of a performer in a 
performance (within the meaning of Part XIA) to authorise the 
body administering an educational institution:
(a) to make, or cause to be made, a sound recording or a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) to communicate, or cause to be communicated, that recording 
or film.
  
Division 4  Educational institutions—statutory licence
113U  Persons acting on behalf of bodies administering educational 
institutions
A reference in this Division (other than the first reference in 
subsection 113S(6)) to the body administering an educational 
institution includes a reference to a person acting on behalf of the 
body.
  
Collecting societies  Division 5
Division 5—Collecting societies
Subdivision A—Declaration of collecting society
113V  Declaration of collecting society
Applications
(1) A body may apply, in writing, to the Minister to be declared to be:
(a) the works collecting society for:
(i) all eligible rights holders; or
(ii) specified classes of eligible rights holders; or
(b) the broadcasts collecting society.
Declarations
(2) After receiving the application, the Minister must do one of the 
following:
(a) declare the body to be a collecting society;
(b) refuse to declare the body to be a collecting society;
(c) both:
(i) refer the application to the Copyright Tribunal in the 
way prescribed by the regulations; and
(ii) notify the body of the referral.
(3) The Copyright Tribunal may declare the body to be a collecting 
society if the Minister refers the application to the Tribunal under 
paragraph (2)(c). The Registrar must notify the Minister of the 
declaration.
Note: Section 153A sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the referral.
(4) A declaration of the body to be a collecting society under this 
section must declare the body to be a collecting society:
(a) for either:
(i) works to which paragraph 113P(1)(b) applies; or
  
Division 5  Collecting societies
(ii) copyright material to which paragraph 113P(2)(b) 
applies; and
(b) for:
(i) if subparagraph (a)(i) of this subsection applies—
specified classes of eligible rights holders; or
(ii) in either case—all eligible rights holders.
(5) The Minister must, by notifiable instrument, give notice of a 
declaration made under this section.
Existing collecting societies
(6) If:
(a) a body is declared to be the works collecting society for an 
eligible rights holder; and
(b) another body is later declared to be the works collecting 
society for the eligible rights holder;
the first declaration ceases to be in effect on the day (the cessation 
day) before the second declaration commences, to the extent the 
first declaration relates to the eligible rights holder.
(7) If:
(a) a remuneration notice given to the first body under 
section 113Q:
(i) is in force on the cessation day; and
(ii) applies to a work; and
(b) the eligible rights holder owns the copyright in the work;
the notice ceases to be in force on the cessation day, to the extent 
the notice applies to the work.
(8) A body cannot be declared to be the broadcasts collecting society 
while another body is declared to be the broadcasts collecting 
society.
Eligible rights holders
(9) In this Act:
  
Collecting societies  Division 5
eligible rights holder means:
(a) for a works collecting society—the owner of the copyright in 
a work; or
(b) for the broadcasts collecting society—any of the following:
(i) the owner of the copyright in a work, a sound recording 
or a cinematograph film (other than a new owner of the 
copyright in a sound recording of a live performance 
within the meaning of section 100AB);
(ii) a performer in a performance (within the meaning of 
Part XIA).
113W  Requirements for declaration of collecting society
The Minister and the Copyright Tribunal must not declare a body 
to be a collecting society for eligible rights holders under 
section 113V unless:
(a) the body is a company limited by guarantee and incorporated 
under a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory 
relating to companies; and
(b) all of those eligible rights holders, or their agents, are entitled 
to become its members; and
(c) its rules prohibit the payment of dividends to its members; 
and
(d) its rules contain such other provisions as are prescribed by 
the regulations, being provisions necessary to ensure that the 
interests of the collecting society’s members who are eligible 
rights holders or their agents are protected adequately, 
including provisions about:
(i) the collection of amounts of equitable remuneration 
payable under remuneration notices given to the society 
under section 113Q; and
(ii) the payment of the administrative costs of the society 
out of amounts collected by it; and
(iii) the distribution of amounts collected by it; and
(iv) the holding on trust by the society of amounts for 
eligible rights holders who are not its members; and
  
Division 5  Collecting societies
(v) access to records of the society by its members.
113X  Revocation of declaration
(1) Subsection (2) applies if the Minister is satisfied that a body 
declared to be a collecting society under section 113V:
(a) is not functioning adequately as the collecting society; or
(b) is not acting in accordance with its rules or in the best 
interests of those of its members who are eligible rights 
holders or their agents; or
(c) has altered its rules so that they no longer comply with 
paragraphs 113W(c) and (d); or
(d) has refused or failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply 
with section 113Z or 113ZA.
(2) The Minister may:
(a) revoke the declaration; or
(b) refer to the Copyright Tribunal, in the way prescribed by the 
regulations, the question whether the declaration should be 
revoked.
(3) The Tribunal may revoke the declaration if:
(a) the Minister refers the question to the Copyright Tribunal 
under paragraph (2)(b); and
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that paragraph (1)(a), (b), (c) or (d) 
applies to the body.
The Registrar must notify the Minister of the revocation.
Note: Section 153A sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the referral.
(4) A revocation under this section must specify the day on which it 
takes effect.
(5) The Minister must, by notifiable instrument, give notice of a 
revocation under this section.
  
Collecting societies  Division 5
(6) Subsection 33(3) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 does not 
apply in relation to a power under section 113V of this Act to make 
a declaration.
Subdivision B—Operation of collecting society
113Y  Scope of this Subdivision
This Subdivision applies to:
(a) a works collecting society; or
(b) the broadcasts collecting society.
113Z  Annual report and accounts
(1) The collecting society must, as soon as practicable after the end of 
each financial year:
(a) prepare a report of its operations during that financial year; 
and
(b) send a copy of the report to the Minister, for presentation to 
the Parliament.
(2) The collecting society must keep accounting records correctly 
recording and explaining the transactions of the society (including 
any transactions as trustee) and the financial position of the 
society.
(3) The accounting records must be kept in such a manner as will 
enable true and fair accounts of the society to be prepared from 
time to time and those accounts to be conveniently and properly 
audited.
(4) The collecting society must:
(a) as soon as practicable after the end of each financial year, 
cause its accounts to be audited by an auditor who is not a 
member of the society; and
(b) must send to the Minister a copy of its accounts as so 
audited.
  
Division 5  Collecting societies
(5) The collecting society must give its members reasonable access to 
copies of all reports and audited accounts prepared under this 
section.
(6) This section does not affect any obligations of a collecting society 
relating to the preparation and lodging of annual returns or 
accounts under the law under which it is incorporated.
113ZA  Amendment of rules
The collecting society must, within 21 days after it alters its rules, 
send a copy of the rules as so altered to the Minister, together with 
a statement setting out:
(a) the effect of the alteration; and
(b) the reasons why it was made.
113ZB  Review of distribution arrangement by Copyright Tribunal
(1) The collecting society or a member of the society may apply to the 
Copyright Tribunal for review of the arrangement adopted, or 
proposed to be adopted, by the society for distributing amounts it 
collects in a period.
Note: Section 153A sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the application.
(2) After an application is made under subsection (1), the Tribunal 
must make an order:
(a) confirming the arrangement; or
(b) varying the arrangement; or
(c) substituting for the arrangement another arrangement for 
distributing amounts the collecting society collects in the 
period.
(3) If the Tribunal makes an order varying the arrangement or 
substituting for it another arrangement, the arrangement reflecting 
the Tribunal’s order:
(a) has effect as if it had been adopted in accordance with the 
society’s rules; and
  
Collecting societies  Division 5
(b) does not affect a distribution started before the order was 
made.
113ZC  Operation of collecting society rules
Division 4 and this Division apply to the collecting society despite 
anything in the rules of the society, but nothing in those Divisions 
affects the rules so far as they can operate together with those 
Divisions.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
Part V—Remedies and offences
Division 1—Preliminary
114  Interpretation
(1) In this Part, action means a proceeding of a civil nature between 
parties, and includes a counterclaim.
(2) In the application of this Part in relation to a counterclaim, 
references to the plaintiff and to the defendant shall be read as 
references to the defendant and to the plaintiff, respectively.
  
Actions by owner of copyright  Division 2
Division 2—Actions by owner of copyright
115  Actions for infringement
(1) Subject to this Act, the owner of a copyright may bring an action 
for an infringement of the copyright.
(2) Subject to this Act, the relief that a court may grant in an action for 
an infringement of copyright includes an injunction (subject to 
such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and either damages or an 
account of profits.
(3) Where, in an action for infringement of copyright, it is established 
that an infringement was committed but it is also established that, 
at the time of the infringement, the defendant was not aware, and 
had no reasonable grounds for suspecting, that the act constituting 
the infringement was an infringement of the copyright, the plaintiff 
is not entitled under this section to any damages against the 
defendant in respect of the infringement, but is entitled to an 
account of profits in respect of the infringement whether any other 
relief is granted under this section or not.
(4) Where, in an action under this section:
(a) an infringement of copyright is established; and
(b) the court is satisfied that it is proper to do so, having regard 
to:
(i) the flagrancy of the infringement; and
(ia) the need to deter similar infringements of copyright; and
(ib) the conduct of the defendant after the act constituting 
the infringement or, if relevant, after the defendant was 
informed that the defendant had allegedly infringed the 
plaintiff’s copyright; and
(ii) whether the infringement involved the conversion of a 
work or other subject-matter from hardcopy or analog 
form into a digital or other electronic machine-readable 
form; and
  
Division 2  Actions by owner of copyright
(iii) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant by 
reason of the infringement; and
(iv) all other relevant matters;
the court may, in assessing damages for the infringement, award 
such additional damages as it considers appropriate in the 
circumstances.
Consideration for relief for electronic commercial infringement
(5) Subsection (6) applies to a court hearing an action for infringement 
of copyright if the court is satisfied that:
(a) the infringement (the proved infringement) occurred 
(whether as a result of the doing of an act comprised in the 
copyright, the authorising of the doing of such an act or the 
doing of another act); and
(b) the proved infringement involved a communication of a work 
or other subject-matter to the public; and
(c) because the work or other subject-matter was communicated 
to the public, it is likely that there were other infringements 
(the likely infringements) of the copyright by the defendant 
that the plaintiff did not prove in the action; and
(d) taken together, the proved infringement and likely 
infringements were on a commercial scale.
(6) The court may have regard to the likelihood of the likely 
infringements (as well as the proved infringement) in deciding 
what relief to grant in the action.
(7) In determining for the purposes of paragraph (5)(d) whether, taken 
together, the proved infringement and the likely infringements 
were on a commercial scale, the following matters are to be taken 
into account:
(a) the volume and value of any articles that:
(i) are infringing copies that constitute the proved 
infringement; or
(ii) assuming the likely infringements actually occurred, 
would be infringing copies constituting those 
infringements;
  
Actions by owner of copyright  Division 2
(b) any other relevant matter.
(8) In subsection (7):
article includes a reproduction or copy of a work or other 
subject-matter, being a reproduction or copy in electronic form.
115A  Injunctions relating to online locations outside Australia
Application for an injunction
(1) The owner of a copyright may apply to the Federal Court of 
Australia to grant an injunction that requires a carriage service 
provider to take such steps as the Court considers reasonable to 
disable access to an online location outside Australia that:
(a) infringes, or facilitates an infringement, of the copyright; and
(b) has the primary purpose or the primary effect of infringing, 
or facilitating an infringement, of copyright (whether or not 
in Australia).
(2) The application under subsection (1) may also request that the 
injunction require an online search engine provider (other than a 
provider that is covered by a declaration under subsection (8B)) to 
take such steps as the Court considers reasonable so as not to 
provide a search result that refers users to the online location.
Granting the injunction
(2A) The Court may grant the injunction in the terms, and subject to the 
conditions, that the Court considers appropriate.
Note 1: For the matters that the Court may take into account when 
determining whether to grant the injunction, see subsection (5).
Note 2: The terms and conditions of the injunction that apply to a carriage 
service provider under subsection (1) may be different from those that 
apply to an online search engine provider under subsection (2).
(2B) Without limiting subsection (2A), the injunction may:
(a) require the carriage service provider to take reasonable steps 
to do either or both of the following:
  
Division 2  Actions by owner of copyright
(i) block domain names, URLs and IP addresses that 
provide access to the online location and that are 
specified in the injunction;
(ii) block domain names, URLs and IP addresses that the 
carriage service provider and the owner of the copyright 
agree, in writing, have started to provide access to the 
online location after the injunction is made; and
(b) require the online search engine provider to take reasonable 
steps to do either or both of the following:
(i) not provide search results that include domain names, 
URLs and IP addresses that provide access to the online 
location and that are specified in the injunction;
(ii) not provide search results that include domain names, 
URLs and IP addresses that the online search engine 
provider and the owner of the copyright agree, in 
writing, have started to provide access to the online 
location after the injunction is made.
Parties
(3) The parties to an action under subsection (1) are:
(a) the owner of the copyright; and
(b) the carriage service provider; and
(ba) if the application under subsection (1) also sought for the 
injunction to apply against an online search engine 
provider—the online search engine provider; and
(c) the person who operates the online location if, but only if, 
that person makes an application to be joined as a party to the 
proceedings.
Service
(4) The owner of the copyright must notify:
(a) the carriage service provider; and
(aa) if the application under subsection (1) also sought for the 
injunction to apply against an online search engine 
provider—the online search engine provider; and
  
Actions by owner of copyright  Division 2
(b) the person who operates the online location;
of the making of an application under subsection (1), but the Court 
may dispense, on such terms as it sees fit, with the notice required 
to be sent under paragraph (b) if the Court is satisfied that the 
owner of the copyright is unable, despite reasonable efforts, to 
determine the identity or address of the person who operates the 
online location, or to send notices to that person.
Matters to be taken into account
(5) In determining whether to grant the injunction, the Court may take 
the following matters into account:
(a) the flagrancy of the infringement, or the flagrancy of the 
facilitation of the infringement, as referred to in 
paragraph (1)(b);
(b) whether the online location makes available or contains 
directories, indexes or categories of the means to infringe, or 
facilitate an infringement of, copyright;
(c) whether the owner or operator of the online location 
demonstrates a disregard for copyright generally;
(d) whether access to the online location has been disabled by 
orders from any court of another country or territory on the 
ground of or related to copyright infringement;
(e) whether disabling access to the online location is a 
proportionate response in the circumstances;
(ea) if the application under subsection (1) also sought for the 
injunction to apply against an online search engine 
provider—whether not providing search results that refer 
users to the online location is a proportionate response in the 
circumstances;
(f) the impact on any person, or class of persons, likely to be 
affected by the grant of the injunction;
(g) whether it is in the public interest to disable access to the 
online location;
(ga) if the application under subsection (1) also sought for the 
injunction to apply against an online search engine 
  
Division 2  Actions by owner of copyright
provider—whether it is in the public interest not to provide 
search results that refer users to the online location;
(h) whether the owner of the copyright complied with 
subsection (4);
(i) any other remedies available under this Act;
(j) any other matter prescribed by the regulations;
(k) any other relevant matter.
Presumption that the online location is outside Australia
(5A) For the purposes of the proceedings, the online location is 
presumed to be outside Australia, unless the contrary is 
established.
Affidavit evidence
(6) For the purposes of the proceedings, section 134A (affidavit 
evidence) applies as if the reference in paragraph 134A(f) to a 
particular act included a reference to a class of acts.
Rescinding and varying injunctions
(7) The Court may:
(a) limit the duration of; or
(b) upon application, rescind or vary;
an injunction granted under this section.
(8) An application under subsection (7) may be made by:
(a) any of the persons referred to in subsection (3); or
(b) any other person prescribed by the regulations.
(8A) An application under subsection (7) must not request the Court to 
vary the injunction so that it applies to an online search engine 
provider that is covered by a declaration under subsection (8B).
Declarations excluding online search engine providers
(8B) The Minister may, by legislative instrument, declare that:
  
Actions by owner of copyright  Division 2
(a) a particular online search engine provider; or
(b) an online search engine provider that is a member of a 
particular class;
must not be specified in an application under subsection (1) or (7).
Costs
(9) A carriage service provider or, if applicable, an online search 
engine provider is not liable for any costs in relation to the 
proceedings unless the provider enters an appearance and takes 
part in the proceedings.
116  Rights of owner of copyright in respect of infringing copies
(1) The owner of the copyright in a work or other subject-matter may 
bring an action for conversion or detention in relation to:
(a) an infringing copy; or
(b) a device (including a circumvention device) used or intended 
to be used for making infringing copies.
(1A) In an action for conversion or detention, a court may grant to the 
owner of the copyright all or any of the remedies that are available 
in such an action as if:
(a) the owner of the copyright had been the owner of the 
infringing copy since the time the copy was made; or
(b) the owner of the copyright had been the owner of the device 
since the time when it was used or intended to be used for 
making infringing copies.
(1B) Any relief granted by a court in an action for conversion or 
detention is in addition to any relief that the court may grant under 
section 115.
(1C) A court is not to grant any relief to the owner of the copyright in an 
action for conversion or detention if the relief that the court has 
granted or proposes to grant under section 115 is, in the opinion of 
the court, a sufficient remedy.
  
Division 2  Actions by owner of copyright
(1D) In deciding whether to grant relief in an action for conversion or 
detention and in assessing the amount of damages payable, the 
court may have regard to the following:
(a) the expenses incurred by the defendant, being a person who 
marketed or otherwise dealt with the infringing copy, in 
manufacturing or acquiring the infringing copy;
(b) whether the expenses were incurred before or after the 
infringing copy was sold or otherwise disposed of by the 
defendant;
(c) any other matter that the court considers relevant.
(1E) If the infringing copy is an article of which only part consists of 
material that infringes copyright, the court, in deciding whether to 
grant relief and in assessing the amount of damages payable, may 
also have regard to the following:
(a) the importance to the market value of the article of the 
material that infringes the copyright;
(b) the proportion the material that infringes copyright bears to 
the article;
(c) the extent to which the material that infringes copyright may 
be separated from the article.
(2) A plaintiff is not entitled by virtue of this section to any damages 
or to any other pecuniary remedy, other than costs, if it is 
established that, at the time of the conversion or detention:
(a) the defendant was not aware, and had no reasonable grounds 
for suspecting, that copyright subsisted in the work or other 
subject-matter to which the action relates;
(b) where the articles converted or detained were infringing 
copies—the defendant believed, and had reasonable grounds 
for believing, that they were not infringing copies; or
(c) where an article converted or detained was a device used or 
intended to be used for making articles—the defendant 
believed, and had reasonable grounds for believing, that the 
articles so made or intended to be made were not or would 
not be, as the case may be, infringing copies.
  
Actions by owner of copyright  Division 2
116AAA  Compensation for acquisition of property
(1) This section applies if, apart from this section, subsections 22(3A) 
and 97(2) and (2A) would result in the acquisition of property from 
a maker of a sound recording of a live performance by a performer 
in the performance otherwise than on just terms.
(2) There is payable to the maker by the performer such amount of 
compensation as is agreed on between those persons, or, failing 
agreement, as is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) Any damages or compensation recovered or other remedy given in 
a proceeding that is commenced otherwise than under this section 
is to be taken into account in assessing compensation payable in a 
proceeding that is commenced under this section and that arises out 
of the same event or transaction.
(4) Any compensation payable in a proceeding that is commenced 
under this section is to be taken into account in assessing any 
damages or compensation or other remedy to be awarded in a 
proceeding that is commenced otherwise than under this section 
and that arises out of the same event or transaction.
(5) In this section:
acquisition of property has the same meaning as in 
paragraph 51(xxxi) of the Constitution.
just terms has the same meaning as in paragraph 51(xxxi) of the 
Constitution.
maker of a sound recording of a live performance means a person 
mentioned in paragraph 22(3A)(a).
performer in a live performance means the following people:
(a) a person who becomes a maker of a sound recording under 
paragraph 22(3A)(b);
(b) if subsection 22(3B) applies—an employer who becomes a 
maker of a sound recording under that subsection.
  
Division 2AA  Limitation on remedies available against service providers
Division 2AA—Limitation on remedies available against 
service providers
Subdivision A—Preliminary
116AA  Purpose of this Division
(1) The purpose of this Division is to limit the remedies that are 
available against service providers for infringements of copyright 
that relate to the carrying out of certain online activities by service 
providers. A service provider must satisfy certain conditions to 
take advantage of the limitations.
Note 1A: For the meaning of service provider, see section 116ABA.
Note 1: Subdivision B contains a description of the relevant activities.
Note 2: Subdivision C contains details of the limitations on remedies.
Note 3: Subdivision D sets out the conditions that must be satisfied for a 
service provider to take advantage of the limitations. The limitations 
are automatic if a service provider complies with the relevant 
conditions.
(2) This Division does not limit the operation of provisions of this Act 
outside this Division in relation to determining whether copyright 
has been infringed.
116AB  Definitions
In this Division:
caching means the reproduction of copyright material on a system 
or network controlled or operated by or for a service provider in 
response to an action by a user in order to facilitate efficient access 
to that material by that user or other users.
industry code means:
(a) an industry code that:
(i) meets any prescribed requirements; and
  
Limitation on remedies available against service providers  Division 2AA
(ii) is registered under Part 6 of the Telecommunications Act 
1997; or
(b) an industry code developed in accordance with the 
regulations.
service provider has the meaning given by section 116ABA.
116ABA  Definition of service provider
(1) Each of the following is a service provider:
(a) a carriage service provider;
(b) an organisation assisting persons with a disability;
(c) the body administering a library, if:
(i) all or part of the collection comprising the library is 
accessible to members of the public directly or through 
interlibrary loans; or
(ii) the principal purpose of the library is to provide library 
services for members of a Parliament;
(d) the body administering an archives;
(e) the body administering a key cultural institution;
(f) the body administering an educational institution.
(2) If a service provider is not:
(a) a carriage service provider; or
(b) an organisation assisting persons with a disability; or
(c) the body administering an educational institution, being an 
educational institution that is a body corporate;
this Division only applies to activities that the service provider 
carries out because of its relationship to the relevant library, 
archives, key cultural institution or educational institution 
mentioned in subsection (1).
  
Division 2AA  Limitation on remedies available against service providers
Subdivision B—Relevant activities
116AC  Category A activity
A service provider carries out a Category A activity by providing 
facilities or services for transmitting, routing or providing 
connections for copyright material, or the intermediate and 
transient storage of copyright material in the course of 
transmission, routing or provision of connections.
116AD  Category B activity
A service provider carries out a Category B activity by caching 
copyright material through an automatic process. The service 
provider must not manually select the copyright material for 
caching.
116AE  Category C activity
A service provider carries out a Category C activity by storing, at 
the direction of a user, copyright material on a system or network 
controlled or operated by or for the service provider.
116AF  Category D activity
A service provider carries out a Category D activity by referring 
users to an online location using information location tools or 
technology.
Subdivision C—Limitations on remedies
116AG  Limitations on remedies
Relevant conditions must be satisfied
(1) A service provider must satisfy the relevant conditions set out in 
Subdivision D before the limitations in this section apply.
  
Limitation on remedies available against service providers  Division 2AA
General limitations
(2) For infringements of copyright that occur in the course of carrying 
out any of the categories of activities set out in Subdivision B, a 
court must not grant relief against a service provider that consists 
of:
(a) damages or an account of profits; or
(b) additional damages; or
(c) other monetary relief.
Category specific limitations
(3) For an infringement of copyright that occurs in the course of the 
carrying out of a Category A activity, the relief that a court may 
grant against a service provider is limited to one or more of the 
following orders:
(a) an order requiring the service provider to take reasonable 
steps to disable access to an online location outside Australia;
(b) an order requiring the service provider to terminate a 
specified account.
(4) For an infringement of copyright that occurs in the course of the 
carrying out of a Category B, C or D activity, the relief that a court 
may grant against a service provider is limited to one or more of 
the following orders:
(a) an order requiring the service provider to remove or disable 
access to infringing copyright material, or to a reference to 
infringing copyright material;
(b) an order requiring the service provider to terminate a 
specified account;
(c) some other less burdensome but comparably effective 
non-monetary order if necessary.
Relevant matters
(5) In deciding whether to make an order of a kind referred to in 
subsection (3) or (4), a court must have regard to:
  
Division 2AA  Limitation on remedies available against service providers
(a) the harm that has been caused to the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright; and
(b) the burden that the making of the order will place on the 
service provider; and
(c) the technical feasibility of complying with the order; and
(d) the effectiveness of the order; and
(e) whether some other comparably effective order would be less 
burdensome.
The court may have regard to other matters it considers relevant.
Subdivision D—Conditions
116AH  Conditions
(1) This table sets out the conditions for each of the categories of 
activities.
Conditions
Item Activity Conditions
1 All categories 1. The service provider must adopt and reasonably 
implement a policy that provides for termination, in 
appropriate circumstances, of the accounts of repeat 
infringers.
2. If there is a relevant industry code in force—the service 
provider must comply with the relevant provisions of 
that code relating to accommodating and not interfering 
with standard technical measures used to protect and 
identify copyright material.
2 Category A 1. Any transmission of copyright material in carrying out 
this activity must be initiated by or at the direction of a 
person other than the service provider.
2. The service provider must not make substantive 
modifications to copyright material transmitted. This 
does not apply to modifications made as part of a 
technical process.
  
Limitation on remedies available against service providers  Division 2AA
Conditions
Item Activity Conditions
3 Category B 1. If the copyright material that is cached is subject to 
conditions on user access at the originating site, the 
service provider must ensure that access to a significant 
part of the cached copyright material is permitted only 
to users who have met those conditions.
2. If there is a relevant industry code in force—the service 
provider must comply with the relevant provisions of 
that code relating to:
(a) updating the cached copyright material; and
(b) not interfering with technology used at the 
originating site to obtain information about the 
use of the copyright material.
3. The service provider must expeditiously remove or 
disable access to cached copyright material upon 
notification in the prescribed form that the material has 
been removed or access to it has been disabled at the 
originating site.
4. The service provider must not make substantive 
modifications to the cached copyright material as it is 
transmitted to subsequent users. This does not apply to 
modifications made as part of a technical process.
  
Division 2AA  Limitation on remedies available against service providers
Conditions
Item Activity Conditions
4 Category C 1. The service provider must not receive a financial 
benefit that is directly attributable to the infringing 
activity if the service provider has the right and ability 
to control the activity.
2. The service provider must expeditiously remove or 
disable access to copyright material residing on its 
system or network upon receipt of a notice in the 
prescribed form that the material has been found to be 
infringing by a court.
2A. The service provider must act expeditiously to remove 
or disable access to copyright material residing on its 
system or network if the service provider:
(a) becomes aware that the material is infringing; or
(b) becomes aware of facts or circumstances that 
make it apparent that the material is likely to be 
infringing.
The service provider does not, in an action relating to 
this Division, bear any onus of proving a matter 
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).
3. The service provider must comply with the prescribed 
procedure in relation to removing or disabling access to 
copyright material residing on its system or network.
  
Limitation on remedies available against service providers  Division 2AA
Conditions
Item Activity Conditions
5 Category D 1. The service provider must not receive a financial 
benefit that is directly attributable to the infringing 
activity if the service provider has the right and ability 
to control the activity.
2. The service provider must expeditiously remove or 
disable access to a reference residing on its system or 
network upon receipt of a notice in the prescribed form 
that the copyright material to which it refers has been 
found to be infringing by a court.
2A. The service provider must act expeditiously to remove 
or disable access to a reference residing on its system 
or network if the service provider:
(a) becomes aware that the copyright material to 
which it refers is infringing; or
(b) becomes aware of facts or circumstances that 
make it apparent that the copyright material to 
which it refers is likely to be infringing.
The service provider does not, in an action relating to 
this Division, bear any onus of proving a matter 
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).
3. The service provider must comply with the prescribed 
procedure in relation to removing or disabling a 
reference residing on its system or network.
(2) Nothing in the conditions is to be taken to require a service 
provider to monitor its service or to seek facts to indicate 
infringing activity except to the extent required by a standard 
technical measure mentioned in condition 2 in table item 1 in the 
table in subsection (1).
(3) In deciding, for the purposes of condition 1 in table items 4 and 5 
in the table in subsection (1), whether a financial benefit is 
otherwise directly attributable to the infringing activity referred to 
in that condition, a court must have regard to:
  
Division 2AA  Limitation on remedies available against service providers
(a) industry practice in relation to the charging of services by 
service providers, including charging based on level of 
activity; and
(b) whether the financial benefit was greater than the benefit that 
would usually result from charging in accordance with 
accepted industry practice.
The court may have regard to other matters it considers relevant.
(4) An act done by a service provider in complying with the prescribed 
procedure referred to in condition 3 in table item 4 in the table in 
subsection (1) does not constitute a failure to satisfy condition 2A 
in that item.
116AI  Evidence of compliance with conditions
If a service provider, in an action relating to this Division, points to 
evidence, as prescribed, that suggests that the service provider has 
complied with a condition, the court must presume, in the absence 
of evidence to the contrary, that the service provider has complied 
with the condition.
Subdivision E—Regulations
116AJ  Regulations
(1) The regulations may provide that a service provider is not liable for 
damages or any other civil remedy as a result of action taken in 
good faith to comply with a condition.
(2) The regulations may provide civil remedies for conduct by relevant 
parties in relation to conditions.
(3) The regulations may prescribe offences for conduct by persons 
issuing notices under the regulations, and prescribe penalties for 
offences against those regulations. The penalties must not exceed 
50 penalty units.
Note: If a body corporate is convicted of an offence against regulations 
made under this section, subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914 
  
Limitation on remedies available against service providers  Division 2AA
allows a court to impose fines of up to 5 times the penalty stated 
above.
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
Division 2A—Actions in relation to technological 
protection measures and electronic rights 
management information
Subdivision A—Technological protection measures
116AK  Definitions
In this Subdivision, computer program has the same meaning as in 
section 47AB.
116AL  Interaction of this Subdivision with Part VAA
This Subdivision does not apply to encoded broadcasts (within the 
meaning of Part VAA).
116AM  Geographical application
(1) This Subdivision applies to acts done in Australia.
(2) This section does not, by implication, affect the interpretation of 
any other provision of this Act.
116AN  Circumventing an access control technological protection 
measure
(1) An owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter may bring an action against a person if:
(a) the work or other subject-matter is protected by an access 
control technological protection measure; and
(b) the person does an act that results in the circumvention of the 
access control technological protection measure; and
(c) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the act 
would have that result.
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
Exception—permission
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if the person has the 
permission of the copyright owner or exclusive licensee to 
circumvent the access control technological protection measure.
Exception—interoperability
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program (the original 
program) that is not an infringing copy and that was 
lawfully obtained; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the original program; 
and
(iia) relates to elements of the original program that will not 
be readily available to the person when the 
circumvention occurs; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of achieving 
interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with the original program or any other 
program.
Exception—encryption research
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable:
(i) the person; or
(ii) if the person is a body corporate—an employee of the 
person;
to do an act; and
(b) the act:
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy and that was lawfully obtained; 
and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analysing flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption 
technology; and
(c) the person or employee is:
(i) engaged in a course of study at an educational 
institution in the field of encryption technology; or
(ii) employed, trained or experienced in the field of 
encryption technology; and
(d) the person or employee:
(i) has obtained permission from the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright to do the act; or
(ii) has made, or will make, a good faith effort to obtain 
such permission.
In this subsection, encryption technology means the scrambling 
and descrambling of information using mathematical formulas or 
algorithms.
Exception—computer security testing
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program that is not an 
infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the computer program; 
and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of testing, 
investigating or correcting the security of a computer, 
computer system or computer network; and
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(iv) will be done with the permission of the owner of the 
computer, computer system or computer network.
Exception—online privacy
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
disabling an undisclosed capability to collect or 
disseminate personally identifying information about 
the online activities of a natural person; and
(iv) will not affect the ability of the person or any other 
person to gain access to the work or other subject-matter 
or any other work or subject-matter.
Exception—law enforcement and national security
(7) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of:
(a) law enforcement; or
(b) national security; or
(c) performing a statutory function, power or duty;
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an 
authority of one of those bodies.
Exception—libraries etc.
(8) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the person is:
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
(i) a library (other than a library that is conducted for the 
profit, direct or indirect, of an individual or individuals); 
or
(ii) a body mentioned in paragraph (a) of the definition of 
archives in subsection 10(1), or in subsection 10(4); or
(iii) an educational institution; and
(c) the act will be done for the sole purpose of making an 
acquisition decision in relation to the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(d) the work or other subject-matter will not be otherwise 
available to the person when the act is done.
Note: A library that is owned by a person conducting a business for profit 
might not itself be conducted for profit (see section 18).
Exception—prescribed acts
(9) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act will not infringe the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) the doing of the act by the person is prescribed by the 
regulations.
Note: For the making of regulations prescribing the doing of an act by a 
person, see section 249.
Burden of proof
(10) The defendant bears the burden of establishing the matters referred 
to in subsections (2) to (9).
116AO  Manufacturing etc. a circumvention device for a 
technological protection measure
(1) An owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter may bring an action against a person if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts with a device:
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(i) manufactures it with the intention of providing it to 
another person;
(ii) imports it into Australia with the intention of providing 
it to another person;
(iii) distributes it to another person;
(iv) offers it to the public;
(v) provides it to another person;
(vi) communicates it to another person; and
(b) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the 
device is a circumvention device for a technological 
protection measure; and
(c) the work or other subject-matter is protected by the 
technological protection measure.
Exception - no promotion, advertising etc.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the device is a circumvention device for the technological 
protection measure only because it was promoted, advertised 
or marketed as having the purpose of circumventing the 
technological protection measure; and
(b) both of the following apply:
(i) the person did not do such promoting, advertising or 
marketing;
(ii) the person did not direct or request (expressly or 
impliedly) another person to do such promoting, 
advertising or marketing.
Exception—interoperability
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the circumvention device will be used to circumvent the 
technological protection measure to enable the doing of an 
act; and
(b) the act:
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program (the original 
program) that is not an infringing copy and that was 
lawfully obtained; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the original program; 
and
(iia) relates to elements of the original program that will not 
be readily available to the person doing the act when the 
circumvention occurs; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of achieving 
interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with the original program or any other 
program.
Exception—encryption research
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention device will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable a 
person (the researcher) to do an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy and that was lawfully obtained; 
and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analysing flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption 
technology; and
(d) the researcher is:
(i) engaged in a course of study at an educational 
institution in the field of encryption technology; or
(ii) employed, trained or experienced in the field of 
encryption technology; and
(e) the researcher:
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(i) has obtained permission from the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright to do the act; or
(ii) has made, or will make, a good faith effort to obtain 
such permission.
In this subsection, encryption technology means the scrambling 
and descrambling of information using mathematical formulas or 
algorithms.
Exception—computer security testing
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention device will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable the 
doing of an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program that is not an 
infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the computer program; 
and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of testing, 
investigating or correcting the security of a computer, 
computer system or computer network; and
(iv) will be done with the permission of the owner of the 
computer, computer system or computer network.
Exception—law enforcement and national security
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of:
(a) law enforcement; or
(b) national security; or
(c) performing a statutory function, power or duty;
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an 
authority of one of those bodies.
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
Burden of proof
(7) The defendant bears the burden of establishing the matters referred 
to in subsections (2) to (6).
116AP  Providing etc. a circumvention service for a technological 
protection measure
(1) An owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter may bring an action against a person if:
(a) the person:
(i) provides a service to another person; or
(ii) offers a service to the public; and
(b) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the 
service is a circumvention service for a technological 
protection measure; and
(c) the work or other subject-matter is protected by the 
technological protection measure.
Exception - no promotion, advertising etc.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the service is a circumvention service for the technological 
protection measure only because it was promoted, advertised 
or marketed as having the purpose of circumventing the 
technological protection measure; and
(b) both of the following apply:
(i) the person did not do such promoting, advertising or 
marketing;
(ii) the person did not direct or request (expressly or 
impliedly) another person to do such promoting, 
advertising or marketing.
Exception—interoperability
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(a) the circumvention service will be used to circumvent a 
technological protection measure to enable the doing of an 
act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program (the original 
program) that is not an infringing copy and that was 
lawfully obtained; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the original program; 
and
(iia) relates to elements of the original program that will not 
be readily available to the person doing the act when the 
circumvention occurs; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of achieving 
interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with the original program or any other 
program.
Exception—encryption research
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention service will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable a 
person (the researcher) to do an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy and that was lawfully obtained; 
and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analysing flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption 
technology; and
(d) the researcher is:
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
(i) engaged in a course of study at an educational 
institution in the field of encryption technology; or
(ii) employed, trained or experienced in the field of 
encryption technology; and
(e) the researcher:
(i) has obtained permission from the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright to do the act; or
(ii) has made, or will make, a good faith effort to obtain 
such permission.
In this subsection, encryption technology means the scrambling 
and descrambling of information using mathematical formulas or 
algorithms.
Exception—computer security testing
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention service will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable the 
doing of an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program that is not an 
infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the computer program; 
and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of testing, 
investigating or correcting the security of a computer, 
computer system or computer network; and
(iv) will be done with the permission of the owner of the 
computer, computer system or computer network.
Exception—law enforcement and national security
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of:
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(a) law enforcement; or
(b) national security; or
(c) performing a statutory function, power or duty;
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an 
authority of one of those bodies.
Burden of proof
(7) The defendant bears the burden of establishing the matters referred 
to in subsections (2) to (6).
116AQ  Remedies in actions under this Subdivision
(1) Without limiting the relief that a court may grant in an action under 
this Subdivision, the relief may include:
(a) an injunction, subject to such terms, if any, as the court 
thinks fit; and
(b) damages or an account of profits; and
(c) if the doing of an act, which is the subject of the action, 
involved a circumvention device—an order that the 
circumvention device be destroyed or dealt with as specified 
in the order.
(2) In assessing damages, the court may award such additional 
damages as it considers appropriate, having regard to:
(a) the flagrancy of the defendant’s acts that are the subject of 
the action; and
(b) the need to deter similar acts; and
(c) the conduct of the defendant after the acts or, if relevant, after 
the defendant was informed that the defendant had allegedly 
done an act that would be the subject of an action under this 
Subdivision; and
(d) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant as a 
result of those acts; and
(e) any other relevant matters.
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
(3) If:
(a) an action has been commenced against a person under this 
Subdivision; and
(b) the doing of an act by the person, which is the subject of the 
action, involved a device; and
(c) the device appears to the court to be a circumvention device;
the court may order that the device be delivered up to the court 
upon such conditions as the court considers appropriate.
(4) This section does not, by implication, affect the interpretation of 
any other provision of this Act.
Subdivision B—Electronic rights management information
116B  Removal or alteration of electronic rights management 
information
(1) This section applies if:
(a) either:
(i) a person removes, from a copy of a work or other 
subject-matter in which copyright subsists, any 
electronic rights management information that relates to 
the work or other subject-matter; or
(ii) a person alters any electronic rights management 
information that relates to a work or other 
subject-matter in which copyright subsists; and
(b) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(c) the person knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
removal or alteration would induce, enable, facilitate or 
conceal an infringement of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter.
(2) If this section applies, the owner or exclusive licensee of the 
copyright may bring an action against the person.
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(3) In an action under subsection (2), it must be presumed that the 
defendant knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
removal or alteration to which the action relates would have the 
effect referred to in paragraph (1)(c) unless the defendant proves 
otherwise.
116C  Distribution to the public etc. of works whose electronic rights 
management information has been removed or altered
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a person does any of the following acts in relation to a work 
or other subject-matter in which copyright subsists without 
the permission of the owner or exclusive licensee of the 
copyright:
(i) distributes a copy of the work or other subject-matter to 
the public;
(ii) imports into Australia a copy of the work or other 
subject-matter for distribution to the public;
(iii) communicates a copy of the work or other 
subject-matter to the public; and
(b) either:
(i) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or other subject-matter has been 
removed from the copy of the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or other subject-matter has been 
altered; and
(c) the person knew that the electronic rights management 
information had been so removed or altered without the 
permission of the owner or exclusive licensee of the 
copyright; and
(d) the person knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
act referred to in paragraph (a) that was done by the person 
would induce, enable, facilitate or conceal an infringement of 
the copyright in the work or other subject-matter.
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
(2) If this section applies, the owner or exclusive licensee of the 
copyright may bring an action against the person.
(3) In an action under subsection (2), it must be presumed that the 
defendant:
(a) had the knowledge referred to in paragraph (1)(c); and
(b) knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the doing of 
the act to which the action relates would have the effect 
referred to in paragraph (1)(d);
unless the defendant proves otherwise.
116CA  Distribution and importation of electronic rights 
management information that has been removed or 
altered
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a person does either of the following acts in relation to 
electronic rights management information that relates to a 
work or other subject-matter in which copyright subsists:
(i) distributes the electronic rights management 
information;
(ii) imports into Australia the electronic rights management 
information for distribution; and
(b) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(c) either:
(i) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter without the permission of the 
owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright; or
(ii) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter with the permission of the owner 
or exclusive licensee of the copyright but the 
information has been altered without that permission; 
and
(d) the person knew that the information had been removed or 
altered without that permission; and
  
Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic rights 
management information  Division 2A
(e) the person knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
act referred to in paragraph (a) that was done by the person 
would induce, enable, facilitate or conceal an infringement of 
the copyright.
(2) If this section applies, the owner or exclusive licensee of the 
copyright may bring an action against the person.
(3) In an action under subsection (2), it must be presumed that the 
defendant:
(a) had the knowledge referred to in paragraph (1)(d); and
(b) knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the doing of 
the act to which the action relates would have the effect 
referred to in paragraph (1)(e);
unless the defendant proves otherwise.
116CB  Exception relating to national security and law enforcement
Sections 116B to 116CA do not apply in respect of anything 
lawfully done for the purposes of law enforcement or national 
security by or on behalf of:
(a) the Commonwealth or a State or Territory; or
(b) an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory.
116D  Remedies in actions under this Subdivision
(1) The relief that a court may grant in an action under this 
Subdivision includes an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as 
the court thinks fit) and either damages or an account of profits.
(2) If, in an action under this Subdivision, the court is satisfied that it 
is proper to do so, having regard to:
(a) the flagrancy of the defendant’s actions that are the subject of 
the action; and
(b) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant as a 
result of those acts; and
(c) any other relevant matters;
  
Division 2A  Actions in relation to technological protection measures and electronic 
rights management information
the court may, in assessing damages, award such additional 
damages as it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
  
Proceedings where copyright is subject to exclusive licence  Division 3
Division 3—Proceedings where copyright is subject to 
exclusive licence
117  Interpretation
In this Division:
if the licence had been an assignment means if, instead of the 
licence, there had been granted (subject to conditions 
corresponding as nearly as practicable with those subject to which 
the licence was granted) an assignment of the copyright in respect 
of its application to the doing, at the places and times authorized by 
the licence, of the acts so authorized.
the other party means:
(a) in relation to the owner of the copyright—the exclusive 
licensee; and
(b) in relation to the exclusive licensee—the owner of the 
copyright.
118  Application
This Division applies to proceedings in relation to a copyright in 
respect of which an exclusive licence has been granted and is in 
force at the time of the events to which the proceedings relate.
119  Rights of exclusive licensee
Subject to the succeeding sections of this Division:
(a) except against the owner of the copyright, the exclusive 
licensee has the same rights of action as he or she would 
have, and is entitled to the same remedies as he or she would 
be entitled to, by virtue of section 115 or 115A if the licence 
had been an assignment, and those rights and remedies are 
concurrent with the rights and remedies of the owner of the 
copyright under that section;
  
Division 3  Proceedings where copyright is subject to exclusive licence
(b) except against the owner of the copyright, the exclusive 
licensee has the same rights of action as he or she would 
have, and is entitled to the same remedies as he or she would 
be entitled to, by virtue of section 116 if the licence had been 
an assignment; and
(c) the owner of the copyright does not have any rights of action 
that he or she would not have, and is not entitled to any 
remedies that he or she would not be entitled to, by virtue of 
section 116 if the licence had been an assignment.
120  Joinder of owner or exclusive licensee as a party
(1) Where:
(a) an action is brought by the owner of the copyright or by the 
exclusive licensee; and
(b) the action, in so far as it is brought under section 115 or 
115A, relates, in whole or in part, to an infringement in 
respect of which the owner and the licensee have concurrent 
rights of action under that section;
the owner or licensee, as the case may be, is not entitled, except 
with the leave of the court, to proceed with the action, in so far as it 
is brought under that section and relates to that infringement, 
unless the other party is joined as a plaintiff in the action or added 
as a defendant.
(2) This section does not affect the granting of an interlocutory 
injunction on the application of the owner of the copyright or of the 
exclusive licensee.
121  Defences available against exclusive licensee
In an action brought by the exclusive licensee by virtue of this 
Division, a defence under this Act that would have been available 
to a defendant in the action if the action had been brought by the 
owner of the copyright is available to that defendant as against the 
exclusive licensee.
  
Proceedings where copyright is subject to exclusive licence  Division 3
122  Assessment of damages where exclusive licence granted
Where an action to which section 120 applies is brought and the 
owner of the copyright and the exclusive licensee are not both 
plaintiffs in the action, the court, in assessing damages in respect of 
an infringement of a kind referred to in that section, shall:
(a) if the plaintiff is the exclusive licensee—take into account 
any liabilities, in respect of royalties or otherwise, to which 
the licence is subject; and
(b) whether the plaintiff is the owner of the copyright or the 
exclusive licensee—take into account any pecuniary remedy 
already awarded to the other party under section 115 in 
respect of that infringement, or any right of action 
exercisable by the other party under that section in respect of 
that infringement, as the case requires.
123  Apportionment of profits between owner and exclusive licensee
Where:
(a) an action, in so far as it is brought under section 115, relates, 
in whole or in part, to an infringement in respect of which the 
owner of the copyright and the exclusive licensee have 
concurrent rights of action under that section; and
(b) in that action, whether the owner of the copyright and the 
exclusive licensee are both parties or not, an account of 
profits is directed to be taken in respect of that infringement;
then, subject to any agreement of which the court is aware by 
which the application of those profits is determined as between the 
owner of the copyright and the exclusive licensee, the court shall 
apportion the profits between them in such a manner as the court 
considers just and shall give such directions as the court considers 
appropriate for giving effect to that apportionment.
Note: However, not all owners of the copyright are entitled to an account of 
profits: see section 100AG.
  
Division 3  Proceedings where copyright is subject to exclusive licence
124  Separate actions in relation to the same infringement
In an action brought by the owner of the copyright or by the 
exclusive licensee:
(a) a judgment or order for the payment of damages in respect of 
an infringement of copyright shall not be given or made 
under section 115 if a final judgment or order has been given 
or made in favour of the other party directing an account of 
profits under that section in respect of the same infringement; 
and
(b) a judgment or order for an account of profits in respect of an 
infringement of copyright shall not be given or made under 
that section if a final judgment or order has been given or 
made in favour of the other party awarding damages or 
directing an account of profits under that section in respect of 
the same infringement.
Note: However, not all owners of the copyright are entitled to damages 
(other than additional damages) or an account of profits: see 
section 100AG.
125  Liability for costs
Where, in an action to which section 120 applies, whether brought 
by the owner of the copyright or by the exclusive licensee, the 
other party is not joined as a plaintiff (either at the commencement 
of the action or at a later time), but is added as a defendant, the 
other party is not liable for any costs in the action unless he or she 
enters an appearance and takes part in the proceedings.
  
Proof of facts in civil actions  Division 4
Division 4—Proof of facts in civil actions
126  Presumptions as to subsistence and ownership of copyright
In an action brought by virtue of this Part:
(a) copyright shall be presumed to subsist in the work or other 
subject-matter to which the action relates if the defendant 
does not put in issue the question whether copyright subsists 
in the work or other subject-matter; and
(b) where the subsistence of the copyright is established—the 
plaintiff shall be presumed to be the owner of the copyright if 
he or she claims to be the owner of the copyright and the 
defendant does not put in issue the question of his or her 
ownership.
126A  Presumptions relating to subsistence of copyright
(1) This section applies to an action under this Part in which the 
defendant puts in issue the question whether copyright subsists in 
the work or other subject matter to which the action relates.
Labels or marks
(2) If a copy of the work or other subject matter, or the packaging or 
container in which the copy is packaged or contained, bears a label 
or mark stating the year and place of the first publication, or of the 
making, of the work or other subject matter, then that year and 
place are presumed to be as stated on the label or mark, unless the 
contrary is established.
Foreign certificates
(3) If a certificate or other document issued in a qualifying country in 
accordance with a law of that country states the year and place of 
the first publication, or of the making, of the work or other subject 
matter, then that year and place are presumed to be as stated in the 
certificate or document, unless the contrary is established.
  
Division 4  Proof of facts in civil actions
(4) For the purposes of this section, a document purporting to be a 
certificate or document referred to in subsection (3) is, unless the 
contrary intention is established, taken to be such a certificate or 
document.
126B  Presumptions relating to ownership of copyright
(1) This section applies to an action under this Part in which the 
defendant puts in issue the question of the plaintiff’s ownership of 
copyright in the work or other subject matter to which the action 
relates.
Labels or marks
(2) If a copy of the work or other subject matter, or the packaging or 
container in which the copy is packaged or contained, bears a label 
or mark stating that a person was the owner of copyright in the 
work or other subject matter at a particular time, then the person is 
presumed to have been the owner of the copyright at the time, 
unless the contrary is established.
Foreign certificates
(3) If a certificate or other document issued in a qualifying country in 
accordance with a law of that country states that a person was the 
owner of copyright in the work or other subject matter at a 
particular time, then the person is presumed to have been the owner 
of the copyright at the time, unless the contrary is established.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a document purporting to be a 
certificate or document referred to in subsection (3) is, unless the 
contrary intention is established, taken to be such a certificate or 
document.
Chains of ownership
(5) If:
(a) subsection (2) or (3) applies; and
(b) the plaintiff produces a document stating the following:
  
Proof of facts in civil actions  Division 4
(i) each subsequent owner of the copyright the subject of 
the action (including the plaintiff’s ownership);
(ii) the date each subsequent owner became the owner of 
that copyright;
(iii) a description of the transaction resulting in each 
subsequent owner becoming the owner of that 
copyright;
then the matters described in subparagraphs (b)(i), (ii) and (iii) are 
presumed to be as stated in the document, unless the contrary is 
established.
(6) If:
(a) neither subsection (2) nor (3) applies; and
(b) the plaintiff produces a document stating the following:
(i) the original owner of the copyright the subject of the 
action;
(ii) each subsequent owner of that copyright (including the 
plaintiff’s ownership);
(iii) the date each owner became the owner of that 
copyright;
(iv) a description of the transaction resulting in each owner 
becoming the owner of that copyright;
then the matters described in subparagraphs (b)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) 
are presumed to be as stated in the document, unless the contrary is 
established.
Offence
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person produces a document under subsection (5) or (6); 
and
(b) the person is reckless as to whether the document is false or 
misleading.
Penalty: 30 penalty units.
  
Division 4  Proof of facts in civil actions
127  Presumptions in relation to authorship of work
(1) Where a name purporting to be that of the author of a literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic work appeared on copies of the work 
as published or a name purporting to be that of the author of an 
artistic work appeared on the work when it was made, the person 
whose name so appeared, if it was his or her true name or a name 
by which he or she was commonly known, shall, in an action 
brought by virtue of this Part, be presumed, unless the contrary is 
established, to be the author of the work and to have made the 
work in circumstances to which subsections 35(4), (5) and (6) do 
not apply.
(2) Where a work is alleged to be a work of joint authorship, the last 
preceding subsection applies in relation to each person alleged to 
be one of the authors of the work as if references in that subsection 
to the author were references to one of the authors.
(3) Where, in an action brought by virtue of this Part in relation to a 
photograph:
(a) it is established that, at the time when the photograph was 
taken, a person was the owner of the material on which the 
photograph was taken or, if the ownership of that material as 
at that time is not established, that a person was the owner of 
the apparatus by which the photograph was taken; or
(b) neither the ownership as at the time when the photograph was 
taken of the material on which it was taken nor the ownership 
as at that time of the apparatus by which it was taken is 
established but it is established that, at the time of the death 
of a person, the photograph was owned by the person or, if 
the ownership of the photograph as at that time is not 
established, was in the possession or custody of the person;
the person shall be presumed, unless the contrary is established, to 
have been the person who took the photograph.
(4) However, if the owner of the material or apparatus was a body 
corporate, then paragraph (3)(a) only applies if the presumption is 
required to determine the ownership of the copyright in the 
photograph.
  
Proof of facts in civil actions  Division 4
Note: For example, the presumption does not apply if it is required to 
determine the duration of the copyright in the photograph.
128  Presumptions in relation to publisher of work
Where, in an action brought by virtue of this Part in relation to a 
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, the last preceding 
section does not apply, but it is established:
(a) that the work was first published in Australia and was so 
published during the period of 70 years that ended 
immediately before the commencement of the calendar year 
in which the action was brought; and
(b) that a name purporting to be that of the publisher appeared on 
copies of the work as first published;
then, unless the contrary is established, copyright shall be 
presumed to subsist in the work and the person whose name so 
appeared shall be presumed to have been the owner of that 
copyright at the time of the publication.
129  Presumptions where author has died
(1) Where, in an action brought by virtue of this Part in relation to a 
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, it is established that the 
author is dead:
(a) the work shall be presumed to be an original work unless the 
contrary is established; and
(b) if it is alleged by the plaintiff that a publication specified in 
the allegation was the first publication of the work, and that it 
took place in a country and on a date so specified—that 
publication shall be presumed, unless the contrary is 
established, to have been the first publication of the work, 
and to have taken place in that country and on that date.
(2) Where:
(a) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work has been 
published; and
(b) the publication was anonymous or is alleged by the plaintiff 
to have been pseudonymous; and
  
Division 4  Proof of facts in civil actions
(c) it is not established that the work has ever been published 
under the true name of the author, or under a name by which 
he or she was commonly known, or that the identity of the 
author is generally known;
paragraphs (1)(a) and (b) apply, in an action brought by virtue of 
this Part in relation to the work, in like manner as those paragraphs 
apply where it is established that the author is dead.
129A  Presumptions relating to computer programs
(1) This section applies to an action under this Part relating to 
copyright in a literary work that is a computer program if:
(a) articles or things embodying all or part of the program have 
been supplied (by sale or otherwise) to the public; and
(b) at the time of the supply, the articles or things, or their 
containers, bore a label or other mark consisting of the letter 
“C” in a circle accompanied by a specified year and the name 
of a person.
(2) It is presumed that:
(a) the computer program is an original literary work; and
(b) the computer program was first published in the year; and
(c) the person was the owner of copyright in the program when 
and where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked;
unless the contrary is established.
(3) A presumption about a person under subsection (2) does not imply 
that the person was the only owner of copyright in the program 
when and where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked.
130  Presumptions relating to sound recordings
(1) This section applies to an action under this Part relating to 
copyright in a sound recording if:
(a) records embodying all or part of the recording have been 
supplied (by sale or otherwise) to the public; and
  
Proof of facts in civil actions  Division 4
(b) at the time of the supply, the records or their containers bore 
a label or other mark.
(2) If the label or mark contained a statement described in an item of 
the table, the matter described in the item is presumed, unless the 
contrary is established.
Statements and matters presumed unless the contrary is established
Item Statement Matter presumed
1 A specified person was the maker of 
the recording
The person was the maker of the 
recording
2 The recording was first published in 
a specified year
The recording was first published in 
the year
3 The recording was first published in 
a specified country
The recording was first published in 
the country
(3) If the label or mark consisted of the letter “P” in a circle 
accompanied by a specified year and the name of a person, it is 
presumed that:
(a) the recording was first published in the year; and
(b) the person was the owner of copyright in the recording when 
and where the records or containers were labelled or marked;
unless the contrary is established.
(4) A presumption about a person under this section does not imply 
that the person was:
(a) the only maker of the recording; or
(b) the only owner of copyright in the recording when and where 
the records or containers were labelled or marked.
  
Division 4  Proof of facts in civil actions
130A  Acts relating to imported copies of sound recordings
(1) In an action for infringement of copyright described in section 37, 
38, 102 or 103 by an act involving an article that is a copy of a 
sound recording, it must be presumed that the copy is not a 
non-infringing copy unless the defendant proves that the copy is a 
non-infringing copy.
Note 1: Sections 37 and 38 deal with infringement of copyright in literary, 
dramatic and musical works (among other things) by commercial 
importation and dealings involving articles.
Note 2: Sections 102 and 103 deal with infringement of copyright in sound 
recordings (among other things) by commercial importation and 
dealings involving articles.
(2) The definition of article in sections 38 and 103 does not affect this 
section.
130B  Acts relating to imported copies of computer programs
(1) In an action by a plaintiff for infringement of copyright described 
in section 37 or 38:
(a) relating to the plaintiff’s copyright in a literary work that is a 
computer program; and
(b) involving an article that has embodied in it a copy of the 
program;
it must be presumed, unless the defendant proves otherwise, that 
the copy is not a non-infringing copy so far as it relates to the 
plaintiff’s copyright.
Note: Sections 37 and 38 deal with infringement of copyright in literary 
works (among other things) by commercial importation and dealings 
involving articles.
(2) The definition of article in section 38 does not affect this section.
130C  Acts relating to imported copies of electronic literary or music 
items
(1) In an action by a plaintiff for infringement of copyright described 
in section 37, 38, 102 or 103:
  
Proof of facts in civil actions  Division 4
(a) relating to the plaintiff’s copyright in a work, or in a 
published edition of a work, that is, or is part of, an electronic 
literary or music item; and
(b) involving an article that has embodied in it a copy of the 
electronic literary or music item;
it must be presumed, unless the defendant proves otherwise, that 
the copy is not a non-infringing copy so far as it relates to the 
plaintiff’s copyright.
Note 1: Sections 37 and 38 deal with infringement of copyright in a work by 
commercial importation and dealings involving articles.
Note 2: Sections 102 and 103 deal with infringement of copyright in a 
published edition of a work (among other things) by commercial 
importation and dealings involving articles.
(2) The definition of article in sections 38 and 103 does not affect this 
section.
131  Presumptions relating to films
(1) Where the name of a person appeared on copies of a 
cinematograph film as made available to the public in such a way 
as to imply that the person was the maker of the film and, in the 
case of a person other than a body corporate, that name was his or 
her true name or a name by which he or she was commonly known, 
that person shall, in an action brought by virtue of this Part, be 
presumed, unless the contrary is established, to be the maker of the 
film and to have made the film in circumstances to which 
subsection 98(3) does not apply.
(2) Subsection (3) applies to an action under this Part relating to 
copyright in a cinematograph film, if:
(a) articles or things embodying the film have been supplied 
commercially; and
(b) at the time of the supply, the articles or things, or their 
containers, bore a label or other mark consisting of the letter 
“C” in a circle accompanied by a specified year and the name 
of a person.
  
Division 4  Proof of facts in civil actions
(3) It is presumed that:
(a) the film was first made in the year; and
(b) the person was the owner of copyright in the film when and 
where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked;
unless the contrary is established.
(4) A presumption about a person under subsection (3) does not imply 
that the person was the only owner of copyright in the film when 
and where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked.
  
Jurisdiction and appeals  Division 4A
Division 4A—Jurisdiction and appeals
131A  Exercise of jurisdiction
(1) The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory in an 
action under this Part shall be exercised by a single Judge of the 
Court.
(2) Despite subsection 39(2) of the Judiciary Act 1903, the Supreme 
Court of a State or Territory does not have jurisdiction in relation 
to applications under section 115A of this Act (injunctions relating 
to online locations outside Australia).
131B  Appeals
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a decision of a court of a State or 
Territory (however constituted) under this Part is final and 
conclusive.
(2) An appeal lies from a decision of a court of a State or Territory 
under this Part:
(a) to the Federal Court of Australia; or
(b) by special leave of the High Court, to the High Court.
131C  Jurisdiction of Federal Court of Australia
Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Court of Australia with 
respect to actions under this Part.
131D  Jurisdiction of Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia 
(Division 2)
Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Circuit and Family Court of 
Australia (Division 2) with respect to civil actions under this Part 
(other than section 115A).
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Division 5—Offences and summary proceedings
Subdivision A—Preliminary
132AA  Definitions
In this Division:
article includes a reproduction or copy of a work or other 
subject-matter, being a reproduction or copy in electronic form.
distribute, except in Subdivision E, includes distribute by way of 
communication.
place of public entertainment includes premises that are occupied 
principally for purposes other than public entertainment but are 
from time to time made available for hire for purposes of public 
entertainment.
profit does not include any advantage, benefit, or gain, that:
(a) is received by a person; and
(b) results from, or is associated with, the person’s private or 
domestic use of any copyright material.
132AB  Geographical application
(1) Subdivisions B, C, D, E and F apply only to acts done in Australia.
(2) This section has effect despite section 14.1 (Standard geographical 
jurisdiction) of the Criminal Code.
Subdivision B—Substantial infringement on a commercial scale
132AC  Commercial-scale infringement prejudicing copyright owner
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the conduct results in one or more infringements of the 
copyright in a work or other subject-matter; and
(c) the infringement or infringements have a substantial 
prejudicial impact on the owner of the copyright; and
(d) the infringement or infringements occur on a commercial 
scale.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the conduct results in one or more infringements of the 
copyright in a work or other subject-matter; and
(c) the infringement or infringements have a substantial 
prejudicial impact on the owner of the copyright and the 
person is negligent as to that fact; and
(d) the infringement or infringements occur on a commercial 
scale and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Determining whether infringements occur on commercial scale
(5) In determining whether one or more infringements occur on a 
commercial scale for the purposes of paragraph (1)(d) or (3)(d), the 
following matters are to be taken into account:
(a) the volume and value of any articles that are infringing 
copies that constitute the infringement or infringements;
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(b) any other relevant matter.
Defence relating to law enforcement and national security
(6) This section does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of law enforcement or national security by or on 
behalf of:
(a) the Commonwealth or a State or Territory; or
(b) an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (6) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence for certain public institutions etc.
(7) This section does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done by 
the following in performing their functions:
(a) a library (other than a library that is conducted for the profit, 
direct or indirect, of an individual or individuals);
(b) a body mentioned in:
(i) paragraph (a) of the definition of archives in 
subsection 10(1); or
(ii) subsection 10(4);
(c) an educational institution;
(d) a public non-commercial broadcaster, including:
(i) a body that provides a national broadcasting service 
within the meaning of the Broadcasting Services Act 
1992; and
(ii) a body that holds a community broadcasting licence 
within the meaning of that Act.
Note 1: A library that is owned by a person conducting a business for profit 
might not itself be conducted for profit (see section 18).
Note 2: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (7) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
(8) This section does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done by 
a person in connection with a work or other subject-matter if:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) the person has custody of the work or other subject-matter 
under an arrangement referred to in section 64 of the 
Archives Act 1983; and
(b) under subsection (7), it would be lawful for the National 
Archives of Australia to do that thing.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (8) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Subdivision C—Infringing copies
132AD  Making infringing copy commercially
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an article, with the intention of:
(i) selling it; or
(ii) letting it for hire; or
(iii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter when 
the article is made.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(a) the person makes an article, with the intention of:
(i) selling it; or
(ii) letting it for hire; or
(iii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter when 
the article is made and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an article in preparation for, or in the 
course of:
(i) selling it; or
(ii) letting it for hire; or
(iii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter when 
the article is made.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AE  Selling or hiring out infringing copy
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) the person sells an article or lets an article for hire; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the sale or letting.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person sells an article or lets an article for hire; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the sale or letting and the person is negligent as to 
that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person sells an article or lets an article for hire; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the sale or letting.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AF  Offering infringing copy for sale or hire
Indictable offences
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade offers or exposes an article for 
sale or hire; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the offer or exposure.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person offers or exposes an article for sale or hire, with 
the intention of obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; 
and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the offer or exposure.
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
Summary offences
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade offers or exposes an article for 
sale or hire; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the offer or exposure and the person is negligent as to 
that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person offers or exposes an article for sale or hire, with 
the intention of obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; 
and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the offer or exposure and the person is negligent as to 
that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(6) An offence against subsection (4) or (5) is a summary offence, 
despite section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offences
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade offers or exposes an article for 
sale or hire; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the offer or exposure.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(8) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person offers or exposes an article for sale or hire, in 
preparation for, or in the course of, obtaining a commercial 
advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the offer or exposure.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(9) Subsections (7) and (8) are offences of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AG  Exhibiting infringing copy in public commercially
Indictable offences
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits an article in public; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the exhibition.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person exhibits an article in public, with the intention of 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the exhibition.
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
Summary offences
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits an article in public; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the exhibition and the person is negligent as to that 
fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person exhibits an article in public, with the intention of 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the exhibition and the person is negligent as to that 
fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(6) An offence against subsection (4) or (5) is a summary offence, 
despite section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offences
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits an article in public; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the exhibition.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(8) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person exhibits an article in public in preparation for, or 
in the course of, obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; 
and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the exhibition.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(9) Subsections (7) and (8) are offences of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AH  Importing infringing copy commercially
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports an article into Australia, with the intention 
of doing any of the following with the article:
(i) selling it;
(ii) letting it for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(iv) offering or exposing it for sale or hire to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing it for trade;
(vi) distributing it to obtain a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(vii) distributing it to an extent that will affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter of which the article is an infringing copy;
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(viii) by way of trade exhibiting it in public;
(ix) exhibiting it in public to obtain a commercial advantage 
or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the import.
(2) An offence against this section is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 650 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports an article into Australia, with the intention 
of doing any of the following with the article:
(i) selling it;
(ii) letting it for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(iv) offering or exposing it for sale or hire to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing it for trade;
(vi) distributing it to obtain a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(vii) distributing it to an extent that will affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter of which the article is an infringing copy;
(viii) by way of trade exhibiting it in public;
(ix) exhibiting it in public to obtain a commercial advantage 
or profit; and
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the import and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports an article into Australia in preparation for, 
or in the course of, doing any of the following with the 
article:
(i) selling it;
(ii) letting it for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(iv) offering or exposing it for sale or hire to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing it for trade;
(vi) distributing it to obtain a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(vii) distributing it to an extent that will affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter of which the article is an infringing copy;
(viii) by way of trade exhibiting it in public;
(ix) exhibiting it in public to obtain a commercial advantage 
or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the import.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AI  Distributing infringing copy
Indictable offences
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes an article, with the intention of:
(i) trading; or
(ii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the distribution.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes an article; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the distribution; and
(d) the extent of the distribution affects prejudicially the owner 
of the copyright.
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Summary offences
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes an article, with the intention of:
(i) trading; or
(ii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the distribution and the person is negligent as to that 
fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes an article; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the distribution and the person is negligent as to that 
fact; and
(d) the extent of the distribution affects prejudicially the owner 
of the copyright and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(6) An offence against subsection (4) or (5) is a summary offence, 
despite section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes an article in preparation for, or in the 
course of:
(i) trading; or
(ii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the distribution.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(9) Subsection (7) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AJ  Possessing infringing copy for commerce
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses an article, with the intention of doing 
any of the following with the article:
(i) selling it;
(ii) letting it for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(iv) offering or exposing it for sale or hire to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing it for trade;
(vi) distributing it to obtain a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(vii) distributing it to an extent that will affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter of which the article is an infringing copy;
(viii) by way of trade exhibiting it in public;
(ix) exhibiting it in public to obtain a commercial advantage 
or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the possession.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Note 1: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Note 2: If the infringing copy was made by converting the work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or other 
electronic machine-readable form, there is an aggravated offence with 
a higher maximum penalty under section 132AK.
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses an article, with the intention of doing 
any of the following with the article:
(i) selling it;
(ii) letting it for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(iv) offering or exposing it for sale or hire to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing it for trade;
(vi) distributing it to obtain a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(vii) distributing it to an extent that will affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter of which the article is an infringing copy;
(viii) by way of trade exhibiting it in public;
(ix) exhibiting it in public to obtain a commercial advantage 
or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the possession and the person is negligent as to that 
fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses an article in preparation for, or in the 
course of, doing any of the following with the article:
(i) selling it;
(ii) letting it for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing it for sale or hire;
(iv) offering or exposing it for sale or hire to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing it for trade;
(vi) distributing it to obtain a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(vii) distributing it to an extent that will affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter of which the article is an infringing copy;
(viii) by way of trade exhibiting it in public;
(ix) exhibiting it in public to obtain a commercial advantage 
or profit; and
(b) the article is an infringing copy of a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the possession.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AK  Aggravated offence—work etc. converted to digital form
(1) An indictable offence against a provision (the basic offence 
provision) of this Subdivision (except sections 132AL and 
132AM) relating to an infringing copy is an aggravated offence if 
the infringing copy was made by converting a work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or 
other electronic machine-readable form.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(2) An aggravated offence is punishable on conviction by a fine of not 
more than 850 penalty units or imprisonment for not more than 5 
years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
(3) To prove an aggravated offence, the prosecution must prove that 
the defendant was reckless with respect to the circumstance that the 
infringing copy was made by converting a work or other 
subject-matter from a hard copy or analog form into a digital or 
other electronic machine-readable form.
Note: The prosecution must also prove all the physical and fault elements of 
the offence against the basic offence provision.
(4) If the prosecution intends to prove an aggravated offence, the 
charge must allege that the infringing copy was made by 
converting a work or other subject-matter from a hard copy or 
analog form into a digital or other electronic machine-readable 
form.
132AL  Making or possessing device for making infringing copy
Indictable offences
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a device, intending it to be used for making 
an infringing copy of a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the making of the device.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses a device, intending it to be used for 
making an infringing copy of a work or other subject-matter; 
and
(b) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the possession.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offences
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a device; and
(b) the device is to be used for copying a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) the copy will be an infringing copy and the person is 
negligent as to that fact; and
(d) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the making of the device and the person is negligent 
as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses a device; and
(b) the device is to be used for copying a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) the copy will be an infringing copy and the person is 
negligent as to that fact; and
(d) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the possession and the person is negligent as to that 
fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(6) To avoid doubt, recklessness is the fault element for the 
circumstance in paragraphs (4)(b) and (5)(b) that the device is to be 
used for copying a work or other subject-matter.
(7) An offence against subsection (4) or (5) is a summary offence, 
despite section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Strict liability offence
(8) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a device; and
(b) the device is to be used for copying a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) the copy will be an infringing copy; and
(d) copyright subsists in the work or other subject-matter at the 
time of the making of the device.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(10) Subsection (8) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
No need to prove which work etc. is to be copied
(11) In a prosecution for an offence against this section, it is not 
necessary to prove which particular work or other subject-matter is 
intended to be, or will be, copied using the device.
132AM  Advertising supply of infringing copy
Summary offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person, by any means, publishes, or causes to be 
published, an advertisement for the supply in Australia of a 
copy (whether from within or outside Australia) of a work or 
other subject-matter; and
(b) the copy is, or will be, an infringing copy.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Location of supply of copy by communication resulting in creation 
of copy
(2) For the purposes of this section, a communication of a work or 
other subject-matter that, when received and recorded, will result 
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
in the creation of a copy of the work or other subject-matter is 
taken to constitute the supply of a copy of the work or other 
subject-matter at the place where the copy will be created.
Subdivision D—Airing of works, sound recordings and films
132AN  Causing work to be performed publicly
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes a literary, dramatic or musical work to be 
performed; and
(b) the performance is in public at a place of public 
entertainment; and
(c) the performance infringes copyright in the work.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes a literary, dramatic or musical work to be 
performed; and
(b) the performance is in public at a place of public 
entertainment; and
(c) the performance infringes copyright in the work and the 
person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
132AO  Causing recording or film to be heard or seen in public
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes:
(i) a sound recording to be heard; or
(ii) images from a cinematograph film to be seen; or
(iii) sound from a cinematograph film to be heard; and
(b) the hearing or seeing occurs in public at a place of public 
entertainment; and
(c) causing the hearing or seeing infringes copyright in the 
recording or film.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes:
(i) a sound recording to be heard; or
(ii) images from a cinematograph film to be seen; or
(iii) sound from a cinematograph film to be heard; and
(b) the hearing or seeing occurs in public at a place of public 
entertainment; and
(c) causing the hearing or seeing infringes copyright in the 
recording or film and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes:
(ii) images from a cinematograph film to be seen; or
(iii) sound from a cinematograph film to be heard; and
(b) the hearing or seeing occurs in public at a place of public 
entertainment; and
(c) causing the hearing or seeing infringes copyright in the 
recording or film.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
Subdivision E—Technological protection measures
132APA  Definitions
In this Subdivision, computer program has the same meaning as in 
section 47AB.
132APB  Interaction of this Subdivision with Part VAA
This Subdivision does not apply to encoded broadcasts (within the 
meaning of Part VAA).
132APC  Circumventing an access control technological protection 
measure
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the conduct results in the circumvention of a technological 
protection measure; and
(c) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(d) the person engages in the conduct with the intention of 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
Defence—permission
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if the person has the 
permission of the copyright owner or exclusive licensee to 
circumvent the access control technological protection measure.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (2) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—interoperability
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program (the original 
program) that is not an infringing copy and that was 
lawfully obtained; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the original program; 
and
(iia) relates to elements of the original program that will not 
be readily available to the person when the 
circumvention occurs; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of achieving 
interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with the original program or any other 
program.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (3) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—encryption research
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable:
(i) the person; or
(ii) if the person is a body corporate—an employee of the 
person;
to do an act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy and that was lawfully obtained; 
and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analysing flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption 
technology; and
(c) the person or employee is:
(i) engaged in a course of study at an educational 
institution in the field of encryption technology; or
(ii) employed, trained or experienced in the field of 
encryption technology; and
(d) the person or employee:
(i) has obtained permission from the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright to do the act; or
(ii) has made, or will make, a good faith effort to obtain 
such permission.
In this subsection, encryption technology means the scrambling 
and descrambling of information using mathematical formulas or 
algorithms.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (4) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—computer security testing
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program that is not an 
infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the computer program; 
and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of testing, 
investigating or correcting the security of a computer, 
computer system or computer network; and
(iv) will be done with the permission of the owner of the 
computer, computer system or computer network.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (5) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—online privacy
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
disabling an undisclosed capability to collect or 
disseminate personally identifying information about 
the online activities of a natural person; and
(iv) will not affect the ability of the person or any other 
person to gain access to the work or other subject-matter 
or any other work or subject-matter.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (6) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—law enforcement and national security
(7) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) law enforcement; or
(b) national security; or
(c) performing a statutory function, power or duty;
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an 
authority of one of those bodies.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (7) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—libraries etc.
(8) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done 
by the following bodies in performing their functions:
(a) a library (other than a library that is conducted for the profit, 
direct or indirect, of an individual or individuals);
(b) a body mentioned in:
(i) paragraph (a) of the definition of archives in 
subsection 10(1); or
(ii) subsection 10(4);
(c) an educational institution;
(d) a public non-commercial broadcaster (including a body that 
provides a national broadcasting service, within the meaning 
of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992, and a body that holds 
a community broadcasting licence within the meaning of that 
Act).
Note 1: A library that is owned by a person conducting a business for profit 
might not itself be conducted for profit (see section 18).
Note 2: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (8) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
(8A) This section does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done by 
a person in connection with a work or other subject-matter if:
(a) the person has custody of the work or other subject-matter 
under an arrangement referred to in section 64 of the 
Archives Act 1983; and
(b) under subsection (8), it would be lawful for the National 
Archives of Australia to do that thing.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (8A) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—prescribed acts
(9) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the person circumvents the access control technological 
protection measure to enable the person to do an act; and
(b) the act will not infringe the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter; and
(c) the doing of the act by the person is prescribed by the 
regulations.
Note 1: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (9) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Note 2: For the making of regulations prescribing the doing of an act by a 
person, see section 249.
132APD  Manufacturing etc. a circumvention device for a 
technological protection measure
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts with a device:
(i) manufactures it with the intention of providing it to 
another person;
(ii) imports it into Australia with the intention of providing 
it to another person;
(iii) distributes it to another person;
(iv) offers it to the public;
(v) provides it to another person;
(vi) communicates it to another person; and
(b) the person does the act with the intention of obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit; and
(c) the device is a circumvention device for a technological 
protection measure.
Penalty: 550 penalty units or imprisonment for 5 years, or both.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
Defence—no promotion, advertising etc.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the device is a circumvention device for the technological 
protection measure only because it was promoted, advertised 
or marketed as having the purpose of circumventing the 
technological protection measure; and
(b) both of the following apply:
(i) the person did not do such promoting, advertising or 
marketing;
(ii) the person did not direct or request (expressly or 
impliedly) another person to do such promoting, 
advertising or marketing.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (2) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—interoperability
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the circumvention device will be used to circumvent the 
technological protection measure to enable the doing of an 
act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program (the original 
program) that is not an infringing copy and that was 
lawfully obtained; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the original program; 
and
(iia) relates to elements of the original program that will not 
be readily available to the person doing the act when the 
circumvention occurs; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of achieving 
interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with the original program or any other 
program.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (3) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Defence—encryption research
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention device will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable a 
person (the researcher) to do an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy and that was lawfully obtained; 
and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analysing flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption 
technology; and
(d) the researcher is:
(i) engaged in a course of study at an educational 
institution in the field of encryption technology; or
(ii) employed, trained or experienced in the field of 
encryption technology; and
(e) the researcher:
(i) has obtained permission from the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright to do the act; or
(ii) has made, or will make, a good faith effort to obtain 
such permission.
In this subsection, encryption technology means the scrambling 
and descrambling of information using mathematical formulas or 
algorithms.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (4) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—computer security testing
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention device will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable the 
doing of an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program that is not an 
infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the computer program; 
and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of testing, 
investigating or correcting the security of a computer, 
computer system or computer network; and
(iv) will be done with the permission of the owner of the 
computer, computer system or computer network.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (5) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—law enforcement and national security
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of:
(a) law enforcement; or
(b) national security; or
(c) performing a statutory function, power or duty;
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an 
authority of one of those bodies.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (6) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—libraries etc.
(7) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done 
by the following bodies in performing their functions:
(a) a library (other than a library that is conducted for the profit, 
direct or indirect, of an individual or individuals);
(b) a body mentioned in:
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(i) paragraph (a) of the definition of archives in 
subsection 10(1); or
(ii) subsection 10(4);
(c) an educational institution;
(d) a public non-commercial broadcaster (including a body that 
provides a national broadcasting service, within the meaning 
of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992, and a body that holds 
a community broadcasting licence within the meaning of that 
Act).
Note 1: A library that is owned by a person conducting a business for profit 
might not itself be conducted for profit (see section 18).
Note 2: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (7) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
(8) This section does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done by 
a person in connection with a work or other subject-matter if:
(a) the person has custody of the work or other subject-matter 
under an arrangement referred to in section 64 of the 
Archives Act 1983; and
(b) under subsection (7), it would be lawful for the National 
Archives of Australia to do that thing.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (8) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
132APE  Providing etc. a circumvention service for a technological 
protection measure
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person:
(i) provides a service to another person; or
(ii) offers a service to the public; and
(b) the person does so with the intention of obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit; and
(c) the service is a circumvention service for a technological 
protection measure.
Penalty: 550 penalty units or imprisonment for 5 years, or both.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
Defence—no promotion, advertising etc.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the service is a circumvention service for the technological 
protection measure only because it was promoted, advertised 
or marketed as having the purpose of circumventing the 
technological protection measure; and
(b) both of the following apply:
(i) the person did not do such promoting, advertising or 
marketing;
(ii) the person did not direct or request (expressly or 
impliedly) another person to do such promoting, 
advertising or marketing.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (2) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—interoperability
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the circumvention service will be used to circumvent a 
technological protection measure to enable the doing of an 
act; and
(b) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program (the original 
program) that is not an infringing copy and that was 
lawfully obtained; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the original program; 
and
(iia) relates to elements of the original program that will not 
be readily available to the person doing the act when the 
circumvention occurs; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of achieving 
interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with the original program or any other 
program.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (3) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Defence—encryption research
(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention service will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable a 
person (the researcher) to do an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a work or other subject-matter that is 
not an infringing copy and that was lawfully obtained; 
and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the work or other 
subject-matter; and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analysing flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption 
technology; and
(d) the researcher is:
(i) engaged in a course of study at an educational 
institution in the field of encryption technology; or
(ii) employed, trained or experienced in the field of 
encryption technology; and
(e) the researcher:
(i) has obtained permission from the owner or exclusive 
licensee of the copyright to do the act; or
(ii) has made, or will make, a good faith effort to obtain 
such permission.
In this subsection, encryption technology means the scrambling 
and descrambling of information using mathematical formulas or 
algorithms.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (4) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—computer security testing
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to the person if:
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(a) the technological protection measure is an access control 
technological protection measure; and
(b) the circumvention service will be used to circumvent the 
access control technological protection measure to enable the 
doing of an act; and
(c) the act:
(i) relates to a copy of a computer program that is not an 
infringing copy; and
(ii) will not infringe the copyright in the computer program; 
and
(iii) will be done for the sole purpose of testing, 
investigating or correcting the security of a computer, 
computer system or computer network; and
(iv) will be done with the permission of the owner of the 
computer, computer system or computer network.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (5) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—law enforcement and national security
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done 
for the purposes of:
(a) law enforcement; or
(b) national security; or
(c) performing a statutory function, power or duty;
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or an 
authority of one of those bodies.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (6) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Defence—libraries etc.
(7) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done 
by the following bodies in performing their functions:
(a) a library (other than a library that is conducted for the profit, 
direct or indirect, of an individual or individuals);
(b) a body mentioned in:
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(i) paragraph (a) of the definition of archives in 
subsection 10(1); or
(ii) subsection 10(4);
(c) an educational institution;
(d) a public non-commercial broadcaster (including a body that 
provides a national broadcasting service, within the meaning 
of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992, and a body that holds 
a community broadcasting licence within the meaning of that 
Act).
Note 1: A library that is owned by a person conducting a business for profit 
might not itself be conducted for profit (see section 18).
Note 2: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (7) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
(8) This section does not apply in respect of anything lawfully done by 
a person in connection with a work or other subject-matter if:
(a) the person has custody of the work or other subject-matter 
under an arrangement referred to in section 64 of the 
Archives Act 1983; and
(b) under subsection (7), it would be lawful for the National 
Archives of Australia to do that thing.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (8) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Subdivision F—Electronic rights management information
132AQ  Removing or altering electronic rights management 
information
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) either:
(i) the person removes, from a copy of the work or 
subject-matter, any electronic rights management 
information that relates to the work or subject-matter; or
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(ii) the person alters any electronic rights management 
information that relates to the work or subject-matter; 
and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) the removal or alteration will induce, enable, facilitate or 
conceal an infringement of the copyright.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) either:
(i) the person removes, from a copy of the work or 
subject-matter, any electronic rights management 
information that relates to the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) the person alters any electronic rights management 
information that relates to the work or subject-matter; 
and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) the removal or alteration will induce, enable, facilitate or 
conceal an infringement of the copyright and the person is 
negligent as to that result.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) either:
(i) the person removes, from a copy of the work or 
subject-matter, any electronic rights management 
information that relates to the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) the person alters any electronic rights management 
information that relates to the work or subject-matter; 
and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) the removal or alteration will induce, enable, facilitate or 
conceal an infringement of the copyright.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AR  Distributing, importing or communicating copies after 
removal or alteration of electronic rights management 
information
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) the person does any of the following acts in relation to the 
work or subject-matter:
(i) distributes a copy of the work or subject-matter with the 
intention of trading or obtaining a commercial 
advantage or profit;
(ii) imports a copy of the work or subject-matter into 
Australia with the intention of trading or obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit;
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(iii) communicates a copy of the work or subject-matter to 
the public; and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) either:
(i) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or subject-matter has been removed 
from the copy of the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or subject-matter has been altered;
without the permission of the owner or exclusive licensee of 
the copyright; and
(e) the person knows that the information has been removed or 
altered without that permission; and
(f) the act referred to in paragraph (b) will induce, enable, 
facilitate or conceal an infringement of the copyright.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) the person does any of the following acts in relation to the 
work or subject-matter:
(i) distributes a copy of the work or subject-matter with the 
intention of trading or obtaining a commercial 
advantage or profit;
(ii) imports a copy of the work or subject-matter into 
Australia with the intention of trading or obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(iii) communicates a copy of the work or subject-matter to 
the public; and
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) either:
(i) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or subject-matter has been removed 
from the copy of the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or subject-matter has been altered;
without the permission of the owner or exclusive licensee of 
the copyright; and
(e) the act referred to in paragraph (b) will induce, enable, 
facilitate or conceal an infringement of the copyright and the 
person is negligent as to that result.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) the person does any of the following acts in relation to the 
work or subject-matter:
(i) distributes a copy of the work or subject-matter in 
preparation for, or in the course of, trading or for 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit;
(ii) imports a copy of the work or subject-matter into 
Australia in preparation for, or in the course of, trading 
or in preparation for, or in the course of, obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(iii) communicates a copy of the work or subject-matter to 
the public; and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(d) either:
(i) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or subject-matter has been removed 
from the copy of the work or subject-matter; or
(ii) any electronic rights management information that 
relates to the work or subject-matter has been altered;
without the permission of the owner or exclusive licensee of 
the copyright; and
(e) the act referred to in paragraph (b) will induce, enable, 
facilitate or conceal an infringement of the copyright.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AS  Distributing or importing electronic rights management 
information
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) the person does either of the following acts in relation to 
electronic rights management information that relates to the 
work or subject-matter:
(i) distributes the electronic rights management 
information with the intention of trading or obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(ii) imports the electronic rights management information 
into Australia with the intention of trading or obtaining 
a commercial advantage or profit; and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) either:
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(i) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter without the permission of the 
owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright; or
(ii) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter with the permission of the owner 
or exclusive licensee of the copyright but the 
information has been altered without that permission; 
and
(e) the person knows that the information has been removed or 
altered without that permission; and
(f) the act referred to in paragraph (b) will induce, enable, 
facilitate or conceal an infringement of the copyright.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) the person does either of the following acts in relation to 
electronic rights management information that relates to the 
work or subject-matter:
(i) distributes the electronic rights management 
information with the intention of trading or obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(ii) imports the electronic rights management information 
into Australia with the intention of trading or obtaining 
a commercial advantage or profit; and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(d) either:
(i) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter without the permission of the 
owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright; or
(ii) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter with the permission of the owner 
or exclusive licensee of the copyright but the 
information has been altered without that permission; 
and
(e) the act referred to in paragraph (b) will induce, enable, 
facilitate or conceal an infringement of the copyright and the 
person is negligent as to that result.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) copyright subsists in a work or other subject-matter; and
(b) the person does either of the following acts in relation to 
electronic rights management information that relates to the 
work or subject-matter:
(i) distributes the electronic rights management 
information in preparation for, or in the course of, 
trading or in preparation for, or in the course of, 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit;
(ii) imports the electronic rights management information 
into Australia in preparation for, or in the course of, 
trading or in preparation for, or in the course of, 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
(c) the person does so without the permission of the owner or 
exclusive licensee of the copyright; and
(d) either:
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(i) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter without the permission of the 
owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright; or
(ii) the information has been removed from a copy of the 
work or subject-matter with the permission of the owner 
or exclusive licensee of the copyright but the 
information has been altered without that permission; 
and
(e) the act referred to in paragraph (b) will induce, enable, 
facilitate or conceal an infringement of the copyright.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
132AT  Defences
Law enforcement and national security
(1) This Subdivision does not apply in respect of anything lawfully 
done for the purposes of law enforcement or national security by or 
on behalf of:
(a) the Commonwealth or a State or Territory; or
(b) an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (1) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Certain public institutions etc.
(2) This Subdivision does not apply in respect of anything lawfully 
done by the following in performing their functions:
(a) a library (other than a library that is conducted for the profit, 
direct or indirect, of an individual or individuals);
(b) a body mentioned in:
(i) paragraph (a) of the definition of archives in 
subsection 10(1); or
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(ii) subsection 10(4);
(c) an educational institution;
(d) a public non-commercial broadcaster, including:
(i) a body that provides a national broadcasting service 
within the meaning of the Broadcasting Services Act 
1992; and
(ii) a body that holds a community broadcasting licence 
within the meaning of that Act.
Note 1: A library that is owned by a person conducting a business for profit 
might not itself be conducted for profit (see section 18).
Note 2: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (2) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
(3) This Subdivision does not apply in respect of anything lawfully 
done by a person in connection with a work or other subject-matter 
if:
(a) the person has custody of the work or other subject-matter 
under an arrangement referred to in section 64 of the 
Archives Act 1983; and
(b) under subsection (2), it would be lawful for the National 
Archives of Australia to do that thing.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (3) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Subdivision G—Evidence
132AU  Prosecution to prove profit
(1) This section applies if, in the prosecution of an offence against this 
Division, either of the following questions is relevant:
(a) whether the defendant intended to obtain a profit;
(b) whether the defendant did something for, in preparation for, 
or in the course of, obtaining a profit.
(2) The burden of proving that any advantage, benefit or gain does not 
result from, or is not associated with, any private or domestic use 
of any copyright material is on the prosecution.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
Note: For the purposes of this Division, section 132AA defines profit as not 
including any advantage, benefit, or gain, that:
(a) is received by a person; and
(b) results from, or is associated with, the person’s private or 
domestic use of any copyright material.
132A  Presumptions in relation to subsistence and ownership of 
copyright
(1) This section applies to a prosecution for an offence against this 
Division, except section 132AM, in relation to a work or other 
subject matter.
Labels or marks
(2) If a copy of the work or other subject matter, or the packaging or 
container in which the copy is packaged or contained, bears a label 
or mark stating the year and place of the first publication, or of the 
making, of the work or other subject matter, then that year and 
place are presumed to be as stated on the label or mark, unless the 
contrary is established.
(3) If a copy of the work or other subject matter, or the packaging or 
container in which the copy is packaged or contained, bears a label 
or mark stating that a person was the owner of copyright in the 
work or other subject matter at a particular time, then the person is 
presumed to have been the owner of the copyright at the time, 
unless the contrary is established.
Foreign certificates
(4) If a certificate or other document issued in a qualifying country in 
accordance with a law of that country states the year and place of 
the first publication, or of the making, of the work or other subject 
matter, then that year and place are presumed to be as stated in the 
certificate or document, unless the contrary is established.
(5) If a certificate or other document issued in a qualifying country in 
accordance with a law of that country states that a person was the 
owner of copyright in the work or other subject matter at a 
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
particular time, then the person is presumed to have been the owner 
of the copyright at the time, unless the contrary is established.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a document purporting to be a 
certificate or document referred to in subsection (4) or (5) is, unless 
the contrary intention is established, taken to be such a certificate 
or document.
132AAA  Presumptions relating to computer programs
(1) This section applies to a prosecution for an offence against this 
Division, except section 132AM, relating to copyright in a literary 
work that is a computer program if:
(a) articles or things embodying all or part of the program have 
been supplied (by sale or otherwise) to the public; and
(b) at the time of the supply, the articles or things, or their 
containers, bore a label or other mark consisting of the letter 
“C” in a circle accompanied by a specified year and the name 
of a person.
(2) It is presumed that:
(a) the computer program is an original literary work; and
(b) the computer program was first published in the year; and
(c) the person was the owner of copyright in the program when 
and where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked;
unless the contrary is established.
(3) A presumption about a person under subsection (2) does not imply 
that the person was the only owner of copyright in the program 
when and where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked.
132B  Presumptions relating to sound recordings
(1) This section applies to a prosecution for an offence against this 
Division, except section 132AM, relating to copyright in a sound 
recording if:
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(a) records embodying all or part of the recording have been 
supplied (by sale or otherwise) to the public; and
(b) at the time of the supply, the records or their containers bore 
a label or other mark.
(2) If the label or other mark contained a statement described in an 
item of the table, the matter described in the item is presumed, 
unless the contrary is established.
Statements and matters to be presumed unless the contrary is established
Item Statement Matter presumed
1 A specified person was the maker of 
the recording
The person was the maker of the 
recording
2 The recording was first published in 
a specified year
The recording was first published in 
the year
3 The recording was first published in 
a specified country
The recording was first published in 
the country
(3) If the label or mark consisted of the letter “P” in a circle 
accompanied by a specified year and the name of a person, it is 
presumed that:
(a) the recording was first published in the year; and
(b) the person was the owner of copyright in the recording when 
and where the records or containers were labelled or marked;
unless the contrary is established.
(4) A presumption about a person under this section does not imply 
that the person was:
(a) the only maker of the recording; or
(b) the only owner of copyright in the recording when and where 
the records or containers were labelled or marked.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
132C  Presumptions relating to films
Presumption about film maker
(1) Subsection (2) applies to a prosecution for an offence against this 
Division, except section 132AM, relating to copyright in a 
cinematograph film if:
(a) copies of the film were made available to the public; and
(b) a person’s name appeared on the copies in such a way as to 
imply that the person was the maker of the film; and
(c) if the person is not a body corporate—the name is his or her 
true name or a name by which he or she is commonly known.
(2) It is presumed that:
(a) the person is the maker of the film; and
(b) the person made the film in circumstances to which 
subsection 98(3) does not apply;
unless the contrary is established.
Presumption about time of making and owner of copyright
(3) Subsection (4) applies to a prosecution for an offence against this 
Division, except section 132AM, relating to copyright in a 
cinematograph film, if:
(a) articles or things embodying the film have been supplied 
commercially; and
(b) at the time of the supply, the articles or things, or their 
containers, bore a label or other mark consisting of the letter 
“C” in a circle accompanied by a specified year and the name 
of a person.
(4) It is presumed that:
(a) the film was first made in the year; and
(b) the person was the owner of copyright in the film when and 
where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked;
unless the contrary is established.
  
Division 5  Offences and summary proceedings
(5) A presumption about a person under subsection (4) does not imply 
that the person was the only owner of copyright in the film when 
and where the articles, things or containers were labelled or 
marked.
Subdivision H—Extra court orders
133  Destruction or delivery up of infringing copies etc.
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a person is charged before a court with an offence against this 
Division, except section 132AM, whether or not the person is 
convicted of the offence; and
(b) the person possesses an article that appears to the court to be 
any of the following:
(i) a circumvention device used or intended to be used in 
conduct constituting an offence against Subdivision E;
(ii) an infringing copy;
(iii) a device or equipment used or intended to be used for 
making infringing copies.
(2) The court may order that the article be destroyed, delivered up to 
the owner of the copyright concerned or dealt with as the court 
thinks fit.
Subdivision I—Procedure and jurisdiction
133A  Courts in which offences may be prosecuted
(1) Prosecutions for offences against this Division may be brought in 
the Federal Court of Australia or in any other court of competent 
jurisdiction.
(2) However, the Federal Court of Australia does not have jurisdiction 
to hear or determine prosecutions for indictable offences, despite 
section 15C of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901.
  
Offences and summary proceedings  Division 5
(3) The Federal Court of Australia has jurisdiction to hear and 
determine prosecutions of the following offences against this 
Division:
(a) summary offences;
(b) offences of strict liability.
133B  Infringement notices
(1) The regulations may make provision enabling a person who is 
alleged to have committed an offence of strict liability against this 
Division to do both of the following as an alternative to 
prosecution:
(a) pay a penalty to the Commonwealth;
(b) forfeit to the Commonwealth:
(i) each article (if any) that is alleged to be an infringing 
copy of a work or other subject-matter and that is 
alleged to have been involved in the commission of the 
offence; and
(ii) each device (if any) that is alleged to have been made to 
be used for making an infringing copy of a work or 
other subject-matter and that is alleged to have been 
involved in the commission of the offence.
Note: Regulations made for this purpose will make provision to the effect 
that a prosecution of an alleged offender will be avoided if the alleged 
offender both pays a penalty to the Commonwealth and forfeits to the 
Commonwealth all relevant articles and devices (if any).
(2) The penalty must equal one-fifth of the maximum fine that a court 
could impose on the person as a penalty for that offence.
  
Division 6  Miscellaneous
Division 6—Miscellaneous
134  Limitation of actions in respect of infringement of copyright
(1) An action shall not be brought for an infringement of copyright or 
in respect of the conversion or detention of an infringing copy, or 
of a device (including a circumvention device) used or intended to 
be used for making infringing copies, after the expiration of six 
years from the time when the infringement took place or the 
infringing copy or device was made, as the case may be.
(2) An action may not be brought under section 116AN, 116AO, 
116AP, 116B, 116C or 116CA in respect of an act done by a 
person if more than 6 years have elapsed from the time when the 
act was done.
134A  Affidavit evidence
(1) Subject to subsection (2), at the trial of a proceeding, being:
(a) an action brought by virtue of this Part; or
(b) a prosecution for an offence against this Act;
evidence that:
(c) at a particular time, copyright subsisted in the work or other 
subject-matter to which the proceeding relates; or
(d) at a particular time, copyright in that work or subject-matter 
was owned by, or exclusively licensed to, a particular person; 
or
(e) at a particular time, copyright in that work or subject-matter 
was not owned by, or exclusively licensed to, a particular 
person; or
(f) a particular act was done without the licence of the owner of 
the copyright, or of the exclusive licensee of the copyright, in 
that work or subject-matter;
may be given by affidavit.
  
Miscellaneous  Division 6
(2) If a party to a proceeding referred to in subsection (1) desires in 
good faith that the person who made an affidavit referred to in that 
subsection that is proposed to be used in the proceeding be 
cross-examined with respect to the matters in the affidavit, the 
affidavit may not be used in the proceeding unless the person 
appears as a witness for such cross-examination or the court in 
which the proceeding is being tried, in its discretion, permits the 
affidavit to be used without the person so appearing.
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
Division 7—Seizure of imported copies of copyright 
material
134B  Interpretation
In this Division:
action period, in relation to particular seized copies, means the 
period prescribed by the regulations after notice of a claim for 
release of the copies is given to the objector under 
section 135AED.
claim period, in relation to particular seized copies, means the 
period prescribed by the regulations after notice of seizure of the 
copies is given to the importer under section 135AC.
Comptroller-General of Customs means the person who is the 
Comptroller-General of Customs in accordance with 
subsection 11(3) or 14(2) of the Australian Border Force Act 2015.
copy, in relation to copyright material, means:
(a) if the copyright material is a work—an article in which the 
work is embodied; or
(b) if the copyright material is a sound recording, or a sound 
broadcast as recorded in a sound recording—a record 
embodying the sound recording; or
(c) if the copyright material is a cinematograph film or a 
television broadcast as recorded in a cinematograph film—an 
article in which the visual images or sounds comprising the 
film are embodied; or
(d) if the copyright material is a published edition of a work—an 
article in which the edition is embodied.
importer, in relation to copies of copyright material, includes a 
person who or which is, or holds himself, herself or itself out to be, 
the owner or importer of the goods comprising the copies.
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
objector, in relation to particular seized copies, means the person 
who gave the notice under subsection 135(2) as a result of the 
giving of which the copies were seized.
owner, in relation to the copyright in copyright material, includes 
an exclusive licensee of the copyright in the material.
personal information has the same meaning as in the Privacy Act 
1988.
seized copies means copies seized under subsection 135(7).
working day means a day that is not:
(a) a Saturday; or
(b) a Sunday; or
(c) a public holiday in the Australian Capital Territory.
135  Restriction of importation of copies of works etc.
(1) In this section:
(a) a reference to Australia does not include a reference to the 
external Territories; and
(b) a reference to importation into Australia does not include a 
reference to importation from such a Territory.
(2) A person may give the Comptroller-General of Customs a written 
notice stating:
(a) that the person is the owner of the copyright in copyright 
material; and
(b) that the person objects to the importation into Australia of 
copies of the copyright material to which this section applies.
(3) A notice under subsection (2):
(a) is to be given together with any prescribed document; and
(b) is to be accompanied by the prescribed fee (if any).
(4) This section applies to a copy of copyright material if the making 
of the copy would, if it had been carried out in Australia by the 
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
person importing the copy, have constituted an infringement of the 
copyright in the copyright material.
(5) Unless it is revoked under subsection (6) or declared to be 
ineffective under subsection (6A), a notice under subsection (2) 
remains in force until:
(a) the end of the period of 4 years commencing on the day on 
which the notice was given; or
(b) the end of the period for which the copyright in the copyright 
material to which the notice relates is to subsist;
whichever is the earlier.
(6) A notice under subsection (2) may be revoked by written notice 
given to the Comptroller-General of Customs by the person who 
gave the first-mentioned notice or by a subsequent owner of the 
copyright in the copyright material to which the notice relates.
(6A) If the Comptroller-General of Customs believes, on reasonable 
grounds, that it is no longer appropriate to give effect to a notice 
given under subsection (2), the Comptroller-General of Customs 
may, by writing, declare the notice to be ineffective.
Note: Subsection 195B(3) requires the Comptroller-General of Customs to 
notify the person who gave the notice of the decision declaring the 
notice to be ineffective.
(7) If:
(a) a notice has been given under subsection (2) in respect of 
copyright material; and
(b) the notice has not been declared to be ineffective or revoked; 
and
(c) a person imports copies of the copyright material to which 
this section applies into Australia for the purpose of:
(i) selling, letting for hire, or by way of trade offering or 
exposing for sale or hire, the copies; or
(ii) distributing the copies for the purpose of trade; or
(iii) distributing the copies for any other purpose to an extent 
that will affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright 
in the copyright material; or
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
(iv) by way of trade exhibiting the copies in public; and
(d) the copies are subject to customs control under the Customs 
Act 1901;
the Comptroller-General of Customs may seize the copies.
(8) The regulations may make provision for or in relation to:
(a) the forms of notices under this section; and
(b) the times at which, and the manner in which, notices are to be 
given; and
(c) the giving of information and evidence to the 
Comptroller-General of Customs.
(9) The regulations may contain provisions similar to the provisions of 
this Division in relation to the importation into external Territories 
(other than importation from Australia or from another such 
Territory) of copies of copyright material.
(10) This Division does not apply to the importation into Australia of 
copies of copyright material whose importation does not constitute 
an infringement of copyright because of section 44A, 44D, 44E, 
44F, 112A, 112D or 112DA.
(10A) This Division does not apply to the importation into Australia of 
copies of copyright material whose importation does not constitute 
an infringement of copyright because of section 44C or 112C.
135AA  Decision not to seize unless expenses are covered
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Comptroller-General of Customs 
may decide not to seize the copies under subsection 135(7) unless 
he or she has been given by the objector (or by one or more of the 
objectors) a written undertaking acceptable to the 
Comptroller-General of Customs to repay to the Commonwealth 
the expenses of seizing the copies.
(2) The Comptroller-General of Customs may decide not to seize the 
copies under subsection 135(7) unless he or she has been given by 
the objector (or one or more of the objectors), instead of an 
undertaking, security in an amount that the Comptroller-General of 
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
Customs considers sufficient to repay to the Commonwealth the 
expenses of seizing the copies if:
(a) an amount payable under an undertaking given by the 
objector (or one or more of the objectors) in relation to other 
copies has not been paid in accordance with the undertaking; 
and
(b) the Comptroller-General of Customs considers it reasonable 
in all the circumstances to require the security.
(3) An undertaking may be withdrawn or varied if the 
Comptroller-General of Customs consents in writing to a written 
request from the objector or objectors to do so.
(4) In this section:
expenses of seizing the copies means the expenses that may be 
incurred by the Commonwealth if the copies were seized.
135AB  Secure storage of seized copies
Seized copies must be taken to such secure place as the 
Comptroller-General of Customs directs.
135AC  Notice of seizure
(1) As soon as is practicable after copies are seized under 
subsection 135(7), the Comptroller-General of Customs must give 
to the importer and the objector, by any means of communication 
(including by electronic means), a notice (the seizure notice) 
identifying the copies and stating that the identified copies have 
been seized.
(2) The seizure notice must state that the copies will be released to the 
importer if:
(a) the importer makes a claim for the release of the copies 
within the claim period; and
(b) the objector has not, by the end of the action period:
(i) instituted an action for infringement of copyright in 
relation to the copies; and
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
(ii) given the Comptroller-General of Customs written 
notice of that action.
(3) The seizure notice must also:
(a) set out the claim period for the copies; and
(b) set out the action period for the copies and state that the 
action period will begin only if the importer makes a claim 
for the release of the copies; and
(c) if the notice is given to the objector—state the name and the 
address of the place of business or residence of the importer 
(if known), unless the Comptroller-General of Customs is 
satisfied, for reasons of confidentiality, that it is not desirable 
to do so; and
(d) if the notice is given to the importer—state the name and the 
address of the place of business or residence of:
(i) the objector; or
(ii) if the objector has nominated a person to be the 
objector’s agent or representative for the purposes of 
this Division—that person;
unless the Comptroller-General of Customs is satisfied, for 
reasons of confidentiality, that it is not desirable to do so.
(8) The Comptroller-General of Customs may, at any time after the 
copies are seized, give to the objector:
(a) the name, and the address of the place of business or 
residence, of any person or body (whether in or outside 
Australia) that made arrangements, on behalf of the importer, 
for the copies to be brought to Australia or any information 
that the Comptroller-General of Customs has, and believes 
on reasonable grounds may help in identifying and locating 
such a person or body; and
(b) any information (including personal information) that the 
Comptroller-General of Customs has, and believes on 
reasonable grounds may be relevant for the purpose of 
identifying and locating the importer.
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
135AD  Inspection, release etc. of seized copies
(1) The Comptroller-General of Customs may permit the objector or 
the importer to inspect the seized copies.
(2) If the objector gives the Comptroller-General of Customs the 
requisite undertakings, the Comptroller-General of Customs may 
permit the objector to remove one or more samples of the seized 
copies from the custody of the Comptroller-General of Customs for 
inspection by the objector.
(3) If the importer gives the Comptroller-General of Customs the 
requisite undertakings, the Comptroller-General of Customs may 
permit the importer to remove one or more samples of the seized 
copies from the custody of the Comptroller-General of Customs for 
inspection by the importer.
(4) The requisite undertakings are undertakings in writing that the 
person giving the undertaking will:
(a) return the sample copies to the Comptroller-General of 
Customs at a specified time that is satisfactory to the 
Comptroller-General of Customs; and
(b) take reasonable care to prevent damage to the sample copies.
(5) If the Comptroller-General of Customs permits inspection of the 
seized copies, or the removal of sample copies, by the objector in 
accordance with this section, the Commonwealth is not liable to 
the importer for any loss or damage suffered by the importer 
arising out of:
(a) damage to any of the seized copies incurred during that 
inspection; or
(b) anything done by the objector or any other person to, or in 
relation to, sample copies removed from the custody of the 
Comptroller-General of Customs or any use made by the 
objector of such sample copies.
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
135AE  Forfeiture of seized copies by consent
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the importer may, by written notice to 
the Comptroller-General of Customs, consent to the seized copies 
being forfeited to the Commonwealth.
(2) The notice must be given before any action for infringement of 
copyright in relation to the copies is instituted.
(3) If the importer gives such a notice, the copies are forfeited to the 
Commonwealth.
135AEA  Claim for release of seized copies
(1) The importer may make a claim to the Comptroller-General of 
Customs for the release of seized copies.
(2) The claim must be made before the end of the claim period for the 
copies.
(3) The claim must contain the information prescribed by the 
regulations.
Note: Sections 137.1 and 137.2 of the Criminal Code create offences for 
providing false or misleading information or documents.
135AEB  Seized copies not claimed are forfeited
(1) Seized copies are forfeited to the Commonwealth if a claim for the 
release of the goods is not made within the claim period for the 
copies.
(2) However, if the Comptroller-General of Customs allows a late 
claim for the copies (see section 135AEC), the copies are taken not 
to have been forfeited.
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
135AEC  Late claim for release of seized copies
(1) The Comptroller-General of Customs may allow the importer to 
make a claim (the late claim) to the Comptroller-General of 
Customs for the release of seized copies after the end of the claim 
period for the copies.
(2) The Comptroller-General of Customs may allow the late claim 
only if:
(a) an action for infringement of copyright in relation to the 
copies has not been instituted; and
(b) the Comptroller-General of Customs considers it reasonable 
in the circumstances; and
(c) the copies have not been disposed of under section 135AI.
135AED  Objector to be notified of claim
(1) If the importer makes a claim for the release of seized copies, the 
Comptroller-General of Customs must, as soon as practicable, give 
notice of the claim to the objector.
(2) The notice:
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) may include any information that the Comptroller-General of 
Customs has, and believes on reasonable grounds may be 
relevant, for the purpose of identifying and locating either or 
both of the following:
(i) the importer of the copies;
(ii) any other person or body (whether in or outside 
Australia) that made arrangements for the copies to be 
brought to Australia.
135AF  Release of seized copies to importer
(1) The Comptroller-General of Customs must release seized copies to 
the importer if:
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
(a) the objector gives written notice to the Comptroller-General 
of Customs stating that the objector consents to the release of 
the seized copies; and
(b) the copies have not been disposed of under section 135AI.
(2) The Comptroller-General of Customs may release seized copies to 
the importer at any time if:
(a) the Comptroller-General of Customs, having regard to 
information that has come to his or her knowledge after the 
copies were seized, is satisfied that there are no reasonable 
grounds for believing that copyright has been infringed by 
the importation of the copies; and
(b) the objector has not brought an action for infringement of 
copyright in relation to the copies.
(3) The Comptroller-General of Customs must release seized copies to 
the importer if:
(a) the importer has made a claim for the release of the copies; 
and
(b) the objector has not, by the end of the action period:
(i) instituted an action for infringement of copyright in 
relation to the copies; and
(ii) given the Comptroller-General of Customs written 
notice of that action.
(4) The Comptroller-General of Customs must release seized copies to 
the importer if:
(a) the importer has made a claim for the release of the copies; 
and
(b) an action for infringement of copyright has been instituted in 
relation to the copies; and
(c) at the end of a period of 20 working days commencing on the 
day on which the action was instituted, there is not in force 
an order of the court in which the action was instituted 
preventing the release of the copies.
(5) This section has effect subject to section 135AH.
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
135AFA  Copies released but not collected are forfeited
Seized copies are forfeited to the Commonwealth if:
(a) the copies are released by the Comptroller-General of 
Customs to the importer; and
(b) the importer does not take possession of the copies within 90 
days of the release.
135AG  Provision relating to actions for infringement of copyright
(1) In this section, infringement action means an action for an 
infringement of copyright constituted by the importation of seized 
copies.
(2) The court in which an infringement action is pending may, on the 
application of a person having a sufficient interest in the 
subject-matter of the action, allow the person to be joined as a 
defendant to the action.
(3) The Comptroller-General of Customs is entitled to be heard on the 
hearing of an infringement action.
(4) In addition to any relief that may be granted apart from this 
section, the court may:
(a) at any time, order that the seized copies be released to the 
importer subject to such conditions (if any) as the court 
thinks fit; or
(b) order that the seized copies not be released to the importer 
before the end of a specified period; or
(c) order that the goods be forfeited to the Commonwealth.
(5) A court may not make an order under paragraph (4)(a) if it is 
satisfied that the Comptroller-General of Customs is required or 
permitted, under any other law of the Commonwealth, to retain 
control of the seized copies.
(6) The Comptroller-General of Customs must comply with an order 
made under subsection (4).
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
(7) If:
(a) the court decides that the relevant copyright was not 
infringed by the importation of the seized copies; and
(b) a defendant to the infringement action satisfies the court that 
he or she has suffered loss or damage as a result of the 
seizure of the copies;
the court may order the objector to pay to that defendant such 
amount as the court determines as compensation for any part of 
that loss or damage that is attributable to a period beginning on or 
after the day on which the action was commenced.
135AH  Retention of control of seized copies
In spite of section 135AF, in a case in which no order has been 
made under subsection 135AG(4) in relation to seized copies, the 
Comptroller-General of Customs is not obliged to release or 
dispose of the copies if the Comptroller-General of Customs is 
required or permitted, under any other law of the Commonwealth, 
to retain control of the copies.
135AI  Disposal of seized copies forfeited to the Commonwealth
(1) Seized copies forfeited to the Commonwealth must be disposed of:
(a) in the manner prescribed by the regulations; or
(b) if no manner of disposal is so prescribed—as the 
Comptroller-General of Customs directs.
(2) However, copies forfeited under section 135AEB must not be 
disposed of until 30 days after their forfeiture.
(3) Subsection (1) does not require the disposal of copies that are 
required in relation to an action for infringement of copyright.
Right of compensation in certain circumstances
(4) Despite the forfeiture of seized copies to the Commonwealth, a 
person may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction under this 
section for compensation for the disposal of the copies.
  
Division 7  Seizure of imported copies of copyright material
(5) A right to compensation exists if:
(a) the copies did not infringe the objector’s copyright; and
(b) the person establishes, to the satisfaction of the court:
(i) that he or she was the owner of the copies immediately 
before they were forfeited; and
(ii) that there were circumstances providing a reasonable 
excuse for the failure to make a claim for the release of 
the copies.
(6) If a right to compensation exists under subsection (4), the court 
must order the payment by the Commonwealth to the person of an 
amount equal to the market value of the copies at the time of their 
disposal.
135AJ  Failure to meet Commonwealth’s expenses of seizure
(1) If an amount payable under an undertaking in relation to copies 
covered by a notice given under section 135 is not paid in 
accordance with the undertaking, the Comptroller-General of 
Customs may decide not to seize copies covered by the notice until 
the amount owing is paid.
(2) An amount not paid under an undertaking:
(a) is a debt due by the objector, or by the objectors jointly or 
each of them separately, to the Commonwealth; and
(b) may be recovered by an action taken in a court of competent 
jurisdiction.
(3) If the amount paid under an undertaking in relation to copies 
covered by a notice given under section 135 is in accordance with 
the undertaking but is not sufficient to meet the expenses incurred 
by the Commonwealth as a result of the action taken by the 
Comptroller-General of Customs under this Division because of 
the notice, the amount of the difference between those expenses 
and the amount paid:
(a) is a debt due by the objector, or by the objectors jointly or 
each of them separately, to the Commonwealth; and
  
Seizure of imported copies of copyright material  Division 7
(b) may be recovered by an action taken in a court of competent 
jurisdiction.
(4) If security given under subsection 135AA(2) by the objector or 
objectors who gave notice under section 135 is not sufficient to 
meet the expenses incurred by the Commonwealth as a result of the 
action taken by the Comptroller-General of Customs under this 
Division because of the notice, the amount of the difference 
between those expenses and the amount of security:
(a) is a debt due by the objector, or by the objectors jointly or 
each of them separately, to the Commonwealth; and
(b) may be recovered by an action taken in a court of competent 
jurisdiction.
135AK  Immunity of the Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is not liable for any loss or damage suffered 
by a person:
(a) because of the seizure of copies, or the failure of the 
Comptroller-General of Customs to seize copies, under this 
Division; or
(b) because of the release of any seized copies.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
Part VAA—Unauthorised access to encoded 
broadcasts
Division 1—Preliminary
135AL  Definitions
In this Part:
action means a proceeding of a civil nature between parties, 
including a counterclaim.
broadcaster means a person licensed under the Broadcasting 
Services Act 1992 to provide a broadcasting service (as defined in 
that Act) by which an encoded broadcast is delivered.
channel provider means a person who:
(a) packages a channel (which might include programs produced 
by the person); and
(b) supplies a broadcaster with the channel; and
(c) carries on a business that involves the supply of the channel;
where, apart from any breaks for the purposes of the transmission 
of incidental matter, the channel is broadcast as part of an encoded 
broadcast service.
decoder means a device (including a computer program) designed 
or adapted to decrypt, or facilitate the decryption of, an encoded 
broadcast.
encoded broadcast means:
(a) a subscription broadcast; or
(b) a broadcast (except a radio broadcast or subscription 
broadcast) that is encrypted and is delivered by a commercial 
broadcasting service, or a national broadcasting service, 
within the meaning of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
subscription broadcast means a broadcast that is encrypted and is 
made available by the broadcaster only to persons authorised by 
the broadcaster to access the broadcast in intelligible form.
unauthorised decoder means a device (including a computer 
program) designed or adapted to decrypt, or facilitate the 
decryption of, an encoded broadcast without the authorisation of 
the broadcaster.
135AM  Counterclaim
In the application of this Part in relation to a counterclaim, 
references to the defendant are to be read as references to the 
plaintiff.
135AN  This Part does not apply to law enforcement activity etc.
This Part does not apply in relation to anything lawfully done for 
the purposes of law enforcement or national security by or on 
behalf of:
(a) the Commonwealth or a State or Territory; or
(b) an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory.
Note: A defendant in proceedings for an offence against this Part bears an 
evidential burden in relation to the matter in this section (see 
subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
  
Division 2  Actions
Division 2—Actions
Subdivision A—Actions relating to unauthorised decoders
135AOA  Making or dealing with unauthorised decoder
(1) A channel provider, or anyone with an interest in the copyright in 
either an encoded broadcast or the content of an encoded 
broadcast, may bring an action against a person if:
(a) the person does any of the acts described in subsection (2) 
with an unauthorised decoder; and
(b) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the 
unauthorised decoder will be used to enable someone to gain 
access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation of 
the broadcaster.
(2) The acts with the unauthorised decoder are as follows:
(a) making the unauthorised decoder;
(b) selling the unauthorised decoder or letting it for hire;
(c) by way of trade, or with the intention of obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit, offering or exposing the 
unauthorised decoder for sale or hire;
(d) exhibiting the unauthorised decoder in public by way of trade 
or with the intention of obtaining a commercial advantage or 
profit;
(e) distributing the unauthorised decoder (including by exporting 
it from Australia) for the purpose of trade, or for a purpose 
that will prejudicially affect a channel provider or anyone 
with an interest in the copyright in either an encoded 
broadcast or the content of an encoded broadcast;
(f) importing the unauthorised decoder into Australia for the 
purpose of:
(i) selling the unauthorised decoder or letting it for hire; or
(ii) by way of trade, or with the intention of obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit, offering or exposing 
the unauthorised decoder for sale or hire; or
  
Actions  Division 2
(iii) exhibiting the unauthorised decoder in public by way of 
trade or with the intention of obtaining a commercial 
advantage or profit; or
(iv) distributing the unauthorised decoder for the purpose of 
trade, or for a purpose that will prejudicially affect a 
channel provider or anyone with an interest in the 
copyright in either an encoded broadcast or the content 
of an encoded broadcast;
(g) making the unauthorised decoder available online to an 
extent that will prejudicially affect a channel provider or 
anyone with an interest in the copyright in either an encoded 
broadcast or the content of an encoded broadcast.
(3) The action may be brought only within 6 years of the act.
(4) In an action under this section it must be presumed that the 
defendant knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
unauthorised decoder would be used as described in 
paragraph (1)(b), unless the defendant proves otherwise.
Subdivision B—Actions relating to decoders for subscription 
broadcasts
135AOB  Making decoder available online
(1) This section permits an action to be brought against a person if:
(a) a decoder was supplied (to the person or someone else) by, or 
with the authorisation of, the broadcaster (the supplying 
broadcaster) of a subscription broadcast; and
(b) the person makes the decoder available online to an extent 
that will prejudicially affect any of the following persons (the 
affected parties):
(i) anyone with an interest in the copyright in a 
subscription broadcast by the supplying broadcaster;
(ii) anyone with an interest in the copyright in the content of 
a subscription broadcast by the supplying broadcaster;
  
Division 2  Actions
(iii) a channel provider who supplies the supplying 
broadcaster with a channel for a subscription broadcast; 
and
(c) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the 
decoder will be used to enable someone to gain access to a 
subscription broadcast without the authorisation of the 
broadcaster.
(2) The action may be brought by any of the affected parties but only 
within 6 years of the person first making the decoder available 
online as described in paragraph (1)(b).
(3) In an action under this section it must be presumed that the 
defendant knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that the 
decoder would be used as described in paragraph (1)(c), unless the 
defendant proves otherwise.
Subdivision C—Actions for unauthorised access to encoded 
broadcasts
135AOC  Causing unauthorised access
(1) This section permits an action to be brought against a person if:
(a) without the authorisation of the broadcaster of an encoded 
broadcast, the person does an act causing the person or 
anyone else to gain access in intelligible form to the 
broadcast or sounds or images from the broadcast; and
(b) the access will prejudicially affect any of the following 
persons (the affected parties):
(i) anyone with an interest in the copyright in an encoded 
broadcast by the broadcaster;
(ii) anyone with an interest in the copyright in the content of 
an encoded broadcast by the broadcaster;
(iii) a channel provider who supplies the broadcaster with a 
channel for an encoded broadcast; and
(c) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the 
access is not authorised by the broadcaster.
  
Actions  Division 2
Note: Paragraph (a)—examples of causing a person to gain access to the 
broadcast or sounds or images from the broadcast include:
(a) using, or authorising the use of, a decoder so the person gains 
access to the broadcast, sounds or images; and
(b) distributing, or authorising the distribution of, the sounds or 
images to the person after they are obtained from the broadcast 
using a decoder.
(2) The action may be brought by any of the affected parties but only 
within 6 years of the act.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to:
(a) an act consisting merely of one or more of the following:
(i) starting the playing of sounds or images in or from the 
broadcast on a device (for example by switching the 
device on);
(ii) listening to sounds in or from the broadcast and/or 
seeing images in or from the broadcast;
(iii) distributing the sounds or images within a single 
dwelling that is occupied by a single household and is 
the subject of an arrangement involving a member of 
the household and the broadcaster about authorisation of 
private access to the broadcast; or
(b) access to the sounds or images gained from:
(i) a cinematograph film, or sound recording, made of the 
encoded broadcast; or
(ii) a copy of such a film or recording.
Note: Paragraph (b)—the making of such a film, recording or copy may be 
an infringement of copyright: see paragraphs 87(a) and (b) and 
section 101.
135AOD  Unauthorised commercial use of subscription broadcast
(1) This section permits an action to be brought against a person if:
(a) without the authorisation of the broadcaster of a subscription 
broadcast, the person uses the broadcast, or sounds or images 
from the broadcast, by way of trade or with the intention of 
obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; and
  
Division 2  Actions
(b) the use prejudicially affects any of the following persons (the 
affected parties):
(i) anyone with an interest in the copyright in the 
broadcast;
(ii) anyone with an interest in the copyright in any content 
of the broadcast;
(iii) the channel provider who supplied the broadcaster with 
the channel for the broadcast; and
(c) the person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the use 
is not authorised by the broadcaster.
(2) The action may be brought by any of the affected parties but only 
within 6 years of the use.
Subdivision D—Court orders
135AOE  Relief
(1) The relief that a court may grant in an action under this Division 
includes an injunction (subject to the terms, if any, the court thinks 
fit) and either damages or an account of profits.
(2) In assessing damages, the court may award such additional 
damages as it considers appropriate, having regard to:
(a) the flagrancy with which the defendant did any of the 
relevant acts; and
(b) the need to deter acts similar to the relevant acts; and
(c) any benefit shown in an action under Subdivision A or B to 
have accrued to the defendant as a result of making or 
dealing with the decoder; and
(d) any benefit shown in an action under Subdivision C to have 
accrued to the defendant or any trade or business carried on 
by, or in association with, the defendant; and
(e) all other relevant matters.
  
Actions  Division 2
135AOF  Destruction of decoder
In an action under this Division, the court may order that the 
relevant decoder (if any) be destroyed or dealt with as specified in 
the order.
Subdivision E—Jurisdiction and appeals
135AP  Exercise of jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory in an 
action under the Part is to be exercised by a single Judge of the 
Court.
135AQ  Appeals
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a decision of a court of a State or 
Territory (however constituted) under this Part is final and 
conclusive.
(2) An appeal lies from a decision of a court of a State or Territory 
under this Part:
(a) to the Federal Court of Australia; or
(b) by special leave of the High Court, to the High Court.
135AR  Jurisdiction of Federal Court of Australia
Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Court of Australia with 
respect to actions under this Part.
135AS  Jurisdiction of Federal Circuit and Family Court of 
Australia (Division 2)
Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Circuit and Family Court of 
Australia (Division 2) with respect to actions under this Part.
  
Division 3  Offences
Division 3—Offences
Subdivision A—Offences
135ASA  Making unauthorised decoder
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an unauthorised decoder; and
(b) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASB  Selling or hiring unauthorised decoder
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person sells or lets for hire an unauthorised decoder; and
(b) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASC  Offering unauthorised decoder for sale or hire
(1) A person commits an offence if:
  
Offences  Division 3
(a) with the intention of obtaining a commercial advantage or 
profit, the person offers or exposes an unauthorised decoder 
for sale or hire; and
(b) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person offers or exposes an unauthorised decoder for sale 
or hire; and
(b) the offer or exposure is by way of trade; and
(c) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASD  Commercially exhibiting unauthorised decoder in public
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person exhibits an unauthorised decoder in public with 
the intention of obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; 
and
(b) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person exhibits an unauthorised decoder in public; and
(b) the exhibition is by way of trade; and
(c) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
  
Division 3  Offences
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASE  Importing unauthorised decoder commercially
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports an unauthorised decoder into Australia 
with the intention of doing any of the following with the 
unauthorised decoder:
(i) selling the unauthorised decoder;
(ii) letting the unauthorised decoder for hire;
(iii) offering or exposing the unauthorised decoder for sale 
or hire, by way of trade or to obtain a commercial 
advantage or profit;
(iv) exhibiting the unauthorised decoder in public by way of 
trade or to obtain a commercial advantage or profit;
(v) distributing the unauthorised decoder for trade;
(vi) distributing the unauthorised decoder to obtain a 
commercial advantage or profit;
(vii) distributing the unauthorised decoder in preparation for, 
or in the course of, engaging in an activity that will 
prejudicially affect a channel provider or anyone with 
an interest in the copyright in either an encoded 
broadcast or the content of an encoded broadcast; and
(b) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
  
Offences  Division 3
135ASF  Distributing unauthorised decoder
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes (including by exporting from Australia) 
an unauthorised decoder with the intention of:
(i) trading; or
(ii) obtaining a commercial advantage or profit; or
(iii) engaging in any other activity that will prejudicially 
affect a channel provider or anyone with an interest in 
the copyright in either an encoded broadcast or the 
content of an encoded broadcast; and
(b) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASG  Making unauthorised decoder available online
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an unauthorised decoder available online; 
and
(b) the unauthorised decoder is made available online to an 
extent that will prejudicially affect a channel provider or 
anyone with an interest in the copyright in either an encoded 
broadcast or the content of an encoded broadcast; and
(c) the unauthorised decoder will be used to enable a person to 
gain access to an encoded broadcast without the authorisation 
of the broadcaster.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
  
Division 3  Offences
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASH  Making decoder available online for subscription broadcast
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) a decoder was supplied (to the person or anyone else) by, or 
with the authorisation of, the broadcaster of a subscription 
broadcast; and
(b) the person makes the decoder available online; and
(c) the decoder is made available online without the 
authorisation of the broadcaster; and
(d) the decoder will be used to enable a person to gain access to a 
subscription broadcast without the authorisation of the 
broadcaster; and
(e) the decoder is made available online to an extent that will 
prejudicially affect any of the following:
(i) anyone with an interest in the copyright in a 
subscription broadcast by the broadcaster;
(ii) anyone with an interest in the copyright in the content of 
a subscription broadcast by the broadcaster;
(iii) a channel provider who supplies the broadcaster with a 
channel for a subscription broadcast.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
135ASI  Unauthorised access to subscription broadcast etc.
A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does an act; and
(b) the act (either alone or in conjunction with other acts) results 
in the person gaining access in intelligible form to a 
  
Offences  Division 3
subscription broadcast or sounds or images from a 
subscription broadcast; and
(c) the access is not authorised by the broadcaster and the person 
knows that; and
(d) the act does not consist merely of one or more of the 
following:
(i) starting the playing of sounds or images in or from the 
broadcast on a device (for example by switching the 
device on);
(ii) listening to sounds in or from the broadcast and/or 
seeing images in or from the broadcast;
(iii) distributing the sounds or images within a single 
dwelling that is occupied by a single household and is 
the subject of an arrangement involving a member of 
the household and the broadcaster about authorisation of 
private access to the broadcast; and
(e) the access to the sounds or images is not gained from:
(i) a cinematograph film, or sound recording, made of the 
encoded broadcast; or
(ii) a copy of such a film or recording.
Note: The making of such a film, recording or copy may be an 
infringement of copyright: see paragraphs 87(a) and (b) and 
section 101.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
135ASJ  Causing unauthorised access to encoded broadcast etc.
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does an act; and
(b) the act is done by way of trade; and
(c) the act results in the person or anyone else gaining access in 
intelligible form to an encoded broadcast or sounds or images 
from an encoded broadcast; and
(d) the access is not authorised by the broadcaster; and
(e) the access to the sounds or images is not gained from:
  
Division 3  Offences
(i) a cinematograph film, or sound recording, made of the 
encoded broadcast; or
(ii) a copy of such a film or recording.
Note: Paragraph (e)—the making of such a film, recording or copy may be 
an infringement of copyright: see paragraphs 87(a) and (b) and 
section 101.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does an act with the intention of obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit; and
(b) the act results in the person or anyone else gaining access in 
intelligible form to an encoded broadcast or sounds or images 
from an encoded broadcast; and
(c) the access is not authorised by the broadcaster; and
(d) the access to the sounds or images is not gained from:
(i) a cinematograph film, or sound recording, made of the 
encoded broadcast; or
(ii) a copy of such a film or recording.
Note: Paragraph (e)—the making of such a film, recording or copy may be 
an infringement of copyright: see paragraphs 87(a) and (b) and 
section 101.
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does an act; and
(b) the act results in anyone else gaining access in intelligible 
form to an encoded broadcast or sounds or images from an 
encoded broadcast; and
(c) the access is not authorised by the broadcaster and the person 
knows that; and
(d) the act does not consist merely of one or more of the 
following:
(i) starting the playing of sounds or images in or from the 
broadcast on a device (for example by switching the 
device on);
(ii) distributing the sounds or images within a single 
dwelling that is occupied by a single household and is 
the subject of an arrangement involving a member of 
  
Offences  Division 3
the household and the broadcaster about authorisation of 
private access to the broadcast; and
(e) the access to the sounds or images is not gained from:
(i) a cinematograph film, or sound recording, made of the 
encoded broadcast; or
(ii) a copy of such a film or recording.
Note: Paragraph (e)—the making of such a film, recording or copy may be 
an infringement of copyright: see paragraphs 87(a) and (b) and 
section 101.
(4) An offence against subsection (1), (2) or (3) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Subdivision B—Prosecutions
135ATA  Courts in which offences may be prosecuted
(1) Prosecutions for offences against this Division may be brought in 
the Federal Court of Australia or in any other court of competent 
jurisdiction.
(2) However, the Federal Court of Australia does not have jurisdiction 
to hear or determine prosecutions for indictable offences, despite 
section 15C of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901.
(3) The Federal Court of Australia has jurisdiction to hear and 
determine prosecutions of summary offences against this Division.
(4) Also, section 4J (except subsection 4J(2)) of the Crimes Act 1914 
applies in relation to the Federal Court of Australia and an 
indictable offence against this Division in the way in which that 
section would apply if that court were a court of summary 
jurisdiction.
Note: Section 4J of the Crimes Act 1914 lets a court of summary jurisdiction 
try indictable offences in certain circumstances and subject to limits 
on the penalties the court can impose.
  
Division 3  Offences
Subdivision C—Further orders by court
135AU  Destruction etc. of unauthorised decoders
(1) The court trying a person for an offence against this Division may 
order that any article in the person’s possession that appears to the 
court to be an unauthorised decoder be destroyed or otherwise dealt 
with as specified in the order.
(2) The court may make the order whether the person is convicted of 
the offence or not.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
Part VC—Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts
Division 1—Preliminary
135ZZI  Definitions
In this Part:
collecting society means a body that is, for the time being, declared 
to be a collecting society under section 135ZZT.
delayed retransmission, in relation to a free-to-air broadcast, 
means a retransmission of the broadcast in an area that has, wholly 
or partly, different local time to the area of the original 
transmission and that is delayed until no later than the equivalent 
local time.
notice holder means the person who is, for the time being, 
appointed to be the notice holder under section 135ZZX.
relevant collecting society, in relation to a remuneration notice, 
means a collecting society for owners of copyright in the same 
kind of work or other subject-matter as that to which the 
remuneration notice relates.
relevant copyright owner means the owner of the copyright in a 
work, a sound recording or a cinematograph film, but does not 
include a new owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance within the meaning of Subdivision B of Division 5 of 
Part IV.
remuneration notice means a notice referred to in section 135ZZL.
retransmitter means a person who makes a retransmission of a 
free-to-air broadcast.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
135ZZJ  Operation of collecting society rules
This Part applies to a collecting society despite anything in the 
rules of the society, but nothing in this Part affects those rules so 
far as they can operate together with this Part.
135ZZJA  Application of Part
(1) This Part does not apply in relation to a retransmission of a 
free-to-air broadcast if the retransmission takes place over the 
internet.
(2) This Part does not apply in relation to a retransmission if:
(a) the retransmission is a re-broadcast by a satellite BSA 
licensee; and
(b) subsection 135ZZZI(1) or (2) applies to the re-broadcast.
  
Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts  Division 2
Division 2—Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts
135ZZK  Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts
(1) The copyright in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in a free-to-air broadcast is not infringed by the 
retransmission of the broadcast if:
(a) a remuneration notice given by, or on behalf of, the 
retransmitter to the relevant collecting society is in force; and
(b) the free-to-air broadcast was made by a broadcaster specified 
in the remuneration notice; and
(c) the retransmitter complies with section 135ZZN.
(2) The copyright in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in a free-to-air broadcast is not infringed by the making of 
a copy of the broadcast for the sole purpose of enabling a delayed 
retransmission of the broadcast to be made.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply if the retransmission of the broadcast 
would infringe the copyright in the broadcast.
(4) If a copy of a broadcast made for the purpose referred to in 
subsection (2) is not destroyed within 7 days after it is made, 
subsection (2) does not apply, and is taken never to have applied, 
in relation to the making of the copy.
(5) In this section, a reference to the making of a copy of a free-to-air 
broadcast is a reference to making a cinematograph film or sound 
recording of the broadcast, or a copy of such a film or sound 
recording.
135ZZL  Remuneration notices
(1) A retransmitter may, by notice in writing given to the relevant 
collecting society by, or on behalf of, the retransmitter, undertake 
to pay equitable remuneration to the society for retransmissions of 
free-to-air broadcasts by specified broadcasters, being 
  
Division 2  Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts
retransmissions made by, or on behalf of, the retransmitter while 
the notice is in force.
(2) A remuneration notice must specify that the amount of equitable 
remuneration is to be assessed on the basis of the records to be kept 
by the retransmitter under section 135ZZN.
(3) A remuneration notice comes into force on the day on which it is 
given to the collecting society, or on such earlier day as is specified 
in the notice, and remains in force until it is revoked.
135ZZM  Amount of equitable remuneration
(1) If a retransmitter gives a remuneration notice to a collecting 
society, the amount of equitable remuneration payable to the 
collecting society for each retransmission made by, or on behalf of, 
the retransmitter while the notice is in force is the amount 
determined by agreement between the retransmitter and the 
collecting society or, failing such agreement, by the Copyright 
Tribunal on application made by either of them.
(2) If a determination has been made by the Copyright Tribunal under 
subsection (1), either the retransmitter or the collecting society 
may, at any time after 12 months from the day on which the 
determination was made, apply to the Tribunal under that 
subsection for a new determination payable to the collecting 
society by the retransmitter for retransmissions made by, or on 
behalf of, the retransmitter.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), different amounts may be 
determined (whether by agreement or by the Copyright Tribunal) 
in relation to different classes of works, sound recordings or 
cinematograph films included in retransmissions.
135ZZN  Record system
(1) If a remuneration notice is given to a collecting society by, or on 
behalf of, a retransmitter, the retransmitter must establish and 
maintain a record system.
  
Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts  Division 2
(2) The record system must provide for a record to be kept of the title 
of each program included in each retransmission made by, or on 
behalf of, the retransmitter of each broadcast made by each 
broadcaster specified in the remuneration notice.
(3) Subject to subsection (2), the record system must be determined by 
agreement between the retransmitter and the collecting society or, 
failing such agreement, by the Copyright Tribunal on application 
made by either of them.
135ZZP  Inspection of records etc.
(1) If a remuneration notice is or has been in force, the collecting 
society to which it was given may, in writing, notify the relevant 
retransmitter that the society wishes, on a day specified in the 
notice, being an ordinary working day of the retransmitter specified 
in the notice, not earlier than 7 days after the day on which the 
notice is given, to do such of the following things as are specified 
in the notice:
(a) assess the number of retransmissions carried out at the 
premises of the retransmitter;
(b) inspect all the relevant records held at those premises that 
relate to the making of retransmissions in reliance on 
section 135ZZK;
(c) inspect such other records held at those premises as are 
relevant to the assessment of the amount of equitable 
remuneration payable by the retransmitter to the society.
(2) Subject to section 135ZZQ, if a collecting society gives a notice, a 
person authorised in writing by the society may, during the 
ordinary working hours of the retransmitter on the day specified in 
the notice (but not before 10 am or after 3 pm), carry out the 
assessment, or inspect the records, to which the notice relates and, 
for that purpose, may enter the premises of the retransmitter.
(3) A retransmitter must take all reasonable precautions, and exercise 
reasonable diligence, to ensure that a person referred to in 
subsection (2) who attends the premises of the retransmitter for the 
purpose of exercising the powers conferred by that subsection is 
  
Division 2  Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts
provided with all reasonable and necessary facilities and assistance 
for the effective exercise of those powers.
(4) A retransmitter who contravenes subsection (3) commits an 
offence punishable, on conviction, by a fine not exceeding 10 
penalty units.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine. See subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914.
135ZZQ  Identity cards
(1) The chief executive officer (however described) of a collecting 
society must issue an identity card to each person authorised by the 
society for the purposes of subsection 135ZZP(2). The identity 
card must satisfy the requirements prescribed by the regulations 
and must contain a recent photograph of the authorised person.
(2) If an authorised person who attends or enters premises for the 
purpose of exercising powers conferred by subsection 135ZZP(2) 
fails to produce his or her identity card when asked to do so by a 
person apparently in charge of the premises, the authorised person 
must not enter or remain on the premises or exercise any other 
powers under subsection 135ZZP(2) at the premises.
(3) A person commits an offence punishable on conviction by a fine 
not exceeding 1 penalty unit if:
(a) the person has been issued with an identity card; and
(b) the person stops being an authorised person; and
(c) the person does not, immediately after he or she stops being 
an authorised person, return the identity card to the relevant 
collecting society.
(4) An authorised person must carry his or her identity card at all times 
when exercising powers under subsection 135ZZP(2).
135ZZR  Revocation of remuneration notice
A remuneration notice may be revoked at any time by the relevant 
retransmitter by notice in writing given to the collecting society to 
  
Retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts  Division 2
which the remuneration notice was given, and the revocation takes 
effect at the end of 3 months after the date of the notice, or on such 
later day as is specified in it.
135ZZS  Request for payment of equitable remuneration
(1) Subject to this section, where a remuneration notice is or has been 
in force, the collecting society to which the notice was given may, 
by notice in writing given to the relevant retransmitter, request the 
retransmitter to pay to the society, within a reasonable time after 
the date of the notice, the amount of equitable remuneration 
specified in the notice, being an amount payable under 
section 135ZZM for retransmissions made by, or on behalf of, the 
retransmitter while the remuneration notice is or was in force.
(2) If an amount specified in a request under subsection (1) is not paid 
in accordance with the request, it may be recovered from the 
retransmitter by the collecting society in the Federal Court of 
Australia or any other court of competent jurisdiction as a debt due 
to the society.
  
Division 3  Collecting societies
Division 3—Collecting societies
135ZZT  Collecting societies
(1) A body may apply to the Minister to be declared as a collecting 
society for all relevant copyright owners or for specified classes of 
relevant copyright owners.
(1A) After receiving the application, the Minister must do one of the 
following:
(a) declare the body to be a collecting society, by notice in the 
Gazette;
(b) refuse to declare the body to be a collecting society;
(c) refer the application to the Copyright Tribunal in the way 
prescribed by the regulations and notify the body of the 
referral.
(1B) A declaration made under paragraph (1A)(a) is not a legislative 
instrument.
(1C) If the Minister refers the application to the Copyright Tribunal, the 
Tribunal may declare the body to be a collecting society.
Note: Section 153P sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the reference.
(1D) A declaration of the body as a collecting society must declare the 
body to be:
(a) the collecting society for all relevant copyright owners; or
(b) the collecting society for classes of relevant copyright owners 
specified in the declaration.
(2) If a body is declared to be the collecting society for a specified 
class of copyright owners and another body is subsequently 
declared to be the collecting society for that class of copyright 
owners:
  
Collecting societies  Division 3
(a) the first-mentioned collecting society ceases to be the 
collecting society for that class of copyright owners on the 
day on which the subsequent declaration is made; and
(b) any remuneration notice given to that collecting society 
ceases to be in force to the extent to which it relates to 
relevant copyright owners included in that class of copyright 
owners.
(3) The Minister and the Copyright Tribunal must not declare a body 
to be a collecting society unless:
(a) it is a company limited by guarantee and incorporated under 
a law in force in a State or Territory relating to companies; 
and
(b) all persons who are included in a class of relevant copyright 
owners to be specified in the declaration, or their agents, are 
entitled to become its members; and
(c) its rules prohibit the payment of dividends to its members; 
and
(d) its rules contain such other provisions as are prescribed, 
being provisions necessary to ensure that the interests of 
members of the collecting society who are relevant copyright 
owners, or their agents, are protected adequately, including, 
in particular, provisions about:
(i) the collection of amounts of equitable remuneration 
payable under section 135ZZM; and
(ii) the payment of the administrative costs of the collecting 
society out of amounts collected by it; and
(iii) the distribution of amounts collected by the collecting 
society; and
(iv) the holding on trust by the collecting society of amounts 
for relevant copyright owners who are not its members; 
and
(v) access to records of the collecting society by its 
members.
(4) If the Minister or the Copyright Tribunal has declared a body to be 
the collecting society for a specified class of copyright owners, the 
  
Division 3  Collecting societies
Minister and the Copyright Tribunal may refuse to declare another 
body to be the collecting society for that class of copyright owners 
unless satisfied that to do so would be in the interests of those 
copyright owners, having regard to the number of members of the 
first-mentioned society, the scope of its activities and such other 
considerations as are relevant.
135ZZU  Revocation of declaration
(1) This section applies if the Minister is satisfied that a body declared 
as a collecting society:
(a) is not functioning adequately as a collecting society; or
(b) is not acting in accordance with its rules or in the best 
interests of those of its members who are relevant copyright 
owners, or their agents; or
(c) has altered its rules so that they no longer comply with 
paragraphs 135ZZT(3)(c) and (d); or
(d) has refused or failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply 
with section 135ZZV or 135ZZW.
(2) The Minister may:
(a) by notice in the Gazette, revoke the declaration; or
(b) refer the question whether the declaration should be revoked 
to the Copyright Tribunal in the way prescribed by the 
regulations.
(3) If the Minister refers the question to the Copyright Tribunal, the 
Tribunal may revoke the declaration if it is satisfied that any of 
paragraphs (1)(a), (b), (c) and (d) applies to the body.
Note: Section 153Q sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the reference.
135ZZV  Annual report and accounts
(1) A collecting society must, as soon as practicable after the end of 
each financial year, prepare a report of its operations during that 
financial year and send a copy of the report to the Minister.
  
Collecting societies  Division 3
(2) The Minister must cause a copy of the report sent to the Minister 
under subsection (1) to be laid before each House of the Parliament 
within 15 sitting days of that House after the receipt of the report 
by the Minister.
(3) A collecting society must keep accounting records correctly 
recording and explaining the transactions of the society (including 
any transactions as trustee) and the financial position of the 
society.
(4) The accounting records must be kept in such a manner as will 
enable true and fair accounts of the society to be prepared from 
time to time and those accounts to be conveniently and properly 
audited.
(5) A collecting society must, as soon as practicable after the end of 
each financial year, cause its accounts to be audited by an auditor 
who is not a member of the society, and must send to the Minister 
a copy of its accounts as so audited.
(6) A collecting society must give its members reasonable access to 
copies of all reports and audited accounts prepared by it under this 
section.
(7) This section does not affect any obligations of a collecting society 
relating to the preparation and lodging of annual returns or 
accounts under the law under which it is incorporated.
135ZZW  Amendment of rules
A collecting society must, within 21 days after it alters its rules, 
send a copy of the rules as so altered to the Minister, together with 
a statement setting out the effect of the alteration and the reasons 
why it was made.
135ZZWA  Applying to Tribunal for review of distribution 
arrangement
(1) A collecting society or a member of a collecting society may apply 
to the Copyright Tribunal for review of the arrangement adopted, 
  
Division 3  Collecting societies
or proposed to be adopted, by the collecting society for distributing 
amounts it collects in a period.
(2) If the Tribunal makes an order under section 153R varying the 
arrangement or substituting for it another arrangement, the 
arrangement reflecting the Tribunal’s order has effect as if it had 
been adopted in accordance with the collecting society’s rules, but 
does not affect a distribution started before the order was made.
  
Interim retransmissions  Division 4
Division 4—Interim retransmissions
135ZZX  Appointment of notice holder
The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a person to be 
the notice holder for the purposes of this Division.
135ZZY  Retransmitting before declaration of collecting society
The copyright in any work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in a retransmission of a free-to-air broadcast is not 
infringed by the making of the retransmission if:
(a) at the time the retransmission is made, a collecting society 
has not been declared; and
(b) a notice given by the retransmitter by whom, or on whose 
behalf, the retransmission was made to the notice holder 
under subsection 135ZZZ(1) is in force; and
(c) the retransmitter complies with section 135ZZN.
135ZZZ  Notices by retransmitters
(1) A retransmitter may at any time before the declaration of the first 
collecting society, by notice in writing given to the notice holder 
by, or on behalf of, the retransmitter, undertake to pay equitable 
remuneration to a collecting society, when it is declared, for 
retransmissions made by, or on behalf of, the retransmitter while 
the notice is in force.
(2) A notice must specify that the amount of equitable remuneration is 
to be assessed on the basis of the records to be kept by the 
retransmitter under section 135ZZN.
(3) A notice comes into force on the day on which it is given to the 
notice holder, or on such later day as is specified in the notice, and 
remains in force until it is revoked.
  
Division 4  Interim retransmissions
(4) A notice may be revoked at any time by the retransmitter by notice 
in writing given to the notice holder, and the revocation takes 
effect on the date of the notice of revocation or on such later date 
as is specified in it.
135ZZZA  Record keeping requirements
If a retransmitter gives a notice to the notice holder under 
section 135ZZZ, sections 135ZZM and 135ZZN apply as if:
(a) references to a collecting society were references to the 
notice holder; and
(b) references to a remuneration notice were references to a 
notice under section 135ZZZ.
135ZZZB  Effect of declaration of collecting society
(1) If:
(a) as a result of the declaration of one or more collecting 
societies, there is a society for all relevant copyright owners; 
and
(b) a notice under section 135ZZZ was in force immediately 
before the day on which the declaration came into force;
then, on and after that day, the notice ceases to have effect as such 
a notice, but is taken, for the purposes of this Part, to be a 
remuneration notice that:
(c) was given by the relevant retransmitter to the collecting 
society, or to each of the collecting societies, as the case may 
be; and
(d) came into force on the same day as the notice came into 
force.
(2) If:
(a) one or more collecting societies are declared for one or more, 
but not for all, classes of relevant copyright owners; and
(b) a notice was in force immediately before the day on which 
the declaration came into force;
then, on and after that day:
  
Interim retransmissions  Division 4
(c) the notice ceases to have effect as such a notice in relation to 
the relevant copyright owners in the class or classes of 
copyright owners for whom a collecting society is declared, 
but is taken, for the purposes of this Part, to be a 
remuneration notice that:
(i) was given by the relevant retransmitter to the collecting 
society or to each of the collecting societies, as the case 
may be; and
(ii) came into force on the same day as the notice came into 
force; and
(d) the notice continues to have effect as such a notice in relation 
to all other relevant copyright owners.
(3) When a notice is, under this section, taken to be a remuneration 
notice, the relevant retransmitter must cause copies of all records 
made under section 135ZZN on or after the day on which the 
notice is taken to have come into force to be sent to the relevant 
collecting society within 21 days after the declaration of the 
collecting society.
  
Division 5  Miscellaneous
Division 5—Miscellaneous
135ZZZC  Relevant copyright owner may authorise retransmitting
Nothing in this Part affects the right of the owner of the copyright 
in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film included in a 
free-to-air broadcast to grant a licence authorising a retransmitter 
to make, or cause to be made, a retransmission of the free-to-air 
broadcast without infringing that copyright.
135ZZZD  Copyright not to vest under this Part
Despite any other provision of this Act, the retransmission of a 
free-to-air broadcast by, or on behalf of, a retransmitter that is not 
an infringement of copyright under this Part, does not vest 
copyright in any work or other subject-matter in any person.
135ZZZE  Licence to retransmit does not authorise copyright 
infringements
The owner of the copyright in a free-to-air broadcast is not taken, 
for the purpose of this Act, to have authorised the infringement of 
copyright in any work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in the broadcast merely because the owner licences the 
retransmission of the broadcast.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
Part VD—Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees
Division 1—Preliminary
135ZZZF  Definitions
In this Part:
collecting society means a body that is, for the time being, declared 
to be a collecting society under section 135ZZZO.
commercial television broadcasting licence has the same meaning 
as in the Broadcasting Services Act 1992.
eligible program has the meaning given by section 135ZZZG.
engage in conduct means:
(a) do an act; or
(b) omit to perform an act.
notice holder means the person who is, for the time being, 
appointed to be the notice holder under section 135ZZZT.
original broadcaster has the meaning given by section 135ZZZG.
relevant collecting society, in relation to a remuneration notice, 
means a collecting society for owners of copyright in the same 
kind of work or other subject-matter as that to which the 
remuneration notice relates.
relevant copyright owner means the owner of the copyright in a 
work, a sound recording or a cinematograph film, but does not 
include a new owner of the copyright in a sound recording of a live 
performance within the meaning of Subdivision B of Division 5 of 
Part IV.
remuneration notice means a notice referred to in 
section 135ZZZJ.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
135ZZZG  Eligible program and original broadcaster
(2) For the purposes of this Part, if the following conditions are 
satisfied in relation to a program:
(a) the program is broadcast by the licensee of a commercial 
television broadcasting licence for a regional licence area 
(within the meaning of section 43AA of the Broadcasting 
Services Act 1992);
(b) the licensee is required to provide the program to a satellite 
BSA licensee under section 43AA of that Act;
then:
(c) the program is an eligible program; and
(d) the licensee mentioned in paragraph (a) is the original 
broadcaster of the eligible program.
(3) For the purposes of this Part, if the following conditions are 
satisfied in relation to a program:
(a) the program is broadcast by the licensee of a commercial 
television broadcasting licence;
(b) the licensee is required to provide the program to a satellite 
BSA licensee under section 43AB or 43AC of the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992;
then:
(c) the program is an eligible program; and
(d) the licensee mentioned in paragraph (a) is the original 
broadcaster of the eligible program.
135ZZZH  Operation of collecting society rules
This Part applies to a collecting society despite anything in the 
rules of the society, but nothing in this Part affects those rules so 
far as they can operate together with this Part.
  
Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees  Division 2
Division 2—Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees
135ZZZI  Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees
Copyright in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in an eligible program
(1) The copyright in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in a broadcast of an eligible program is not infringed by 
the re-broadcast of the eligible program if:
(a) the eligible program is re-broadcast by a satellite BSA 
licensee; and
(b) the eligible program is re-broadcast on a service authorised 
by the satellite BSA licensee’s satellite BSA licence; and
(c) the re-broadcast of the eligible program complies with the 
conditions of the satellite BSA licensee’s satellite BSA 
licence that are set out in clause 7A of Schedule 2 to the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992; and
(d) a remuneration notice given by the satellite BSA licensee to 
the relevant collecting society is in force; and
(e) the original broadcaster of the eligible program was specified 
in the remuneration notice; and
(f) the satellite BSA licensee complies with section 135ZZZL.
Copyright in a broadcast of an eligible program
(2) The copyright in a broadcast of an eligible program is not infringed 
by the re-broadcast of the eligible program if:
(a) the eligible program is re-broadcast by a satellite BSA 
licensee; and
(b) the eligible program is re-broadcast on a service authorised 
by the satellite BSA licensee’s satellite BSA licence; and
(c) the re-broadcast of the eligible program complies with the 
conditions of the satellite BSA licensee’s satellite BSA 
licence that are set out in clause 7A of Schedule 2 to the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992; and
  
Division 2  Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees
(d) any of the following conditions is satisfied:
(i) there is an agreement in force between the satellite BSA 
licensee and the owner of the copyright in the broadcast 
of the eligible program as to the amount payable by the 
satellite BSA licensee to the owner of the copyright for 
the re-broadcast of eligible programs during a particular 
period;
(ii) if there is no agreement—there is in force a 
determination of the Copyright Tribunal under 
section 153RA of the amount payable by the satellite 
BSA licensee to the owner of the copyright in the 
broadcast of the eligible program for the re-broadcast of 
eligible programs during a particular period;
(iii) if there is no agreement or determination—the satellite 
BSA licensee has given the owner of the copyright in 
the broadcast of the eligible program a written 
undertaking to pay to the owner of the copyright such 
amount as is determined by the Copyright Tribunal 
under section 153RA for the re-broadcast of eligible 
programs during a particular period; and
(e) the eligible program is re-broadcast by the satellite BSA 
licensee during the period mentioned in whichever of 
subparagraphs (d)(i), (ii) or (iii) applies.
Making a copy for the purpose of a re-broadcast
(3) The copyright in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in a broadcast of an eligible program is not infringed by 
the making of a copy of the eligible program if:
(a) the sole purpose of making the copy is to enable a 
re-broadcast of the eligible program at a later time; and
(b) subsection (1) would apply to the re-broadcast of the eligible 
program at the later time.
(4) The copyright in a broadcast of an eligible program is not infringed 
by the making of a copy of the eligible program if:
(a) the sole purpose of making the copy is to enable a 
re-broadcast of the eligible program at a later time; and
  
Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees  Division 2
(b) subsection (2) would apply to the re-broadcast of the eligible 
program at the later time.
(5) If:
(a) a copy of an eligible program is made for a purpose referred 
to in subsection (3) or (4); and
(b) under a law of the Commonwealth, the satellite BSA licensee 
is required to retain the copy for a period longer than 7 days 
after the copy is made; and
(c) the copy is not destroyed as soon as practicable after the end 
of that period;
subsection (3) or (4), as the case requires, does not apply, and is 
taken never to have applied, in relation to the making of the copy.
(5A) If:
(a) a copy of an eligible program is made for a purpose referred 
to in subsection (3) or (4); and
(b) subsection (5) does not apply; and
(c) the copy is not destroyed within 7 days after it is made;
subsection (3) or (4), as the case requires, does not apply, and is 
taken never to have applied, in relation to the making of the copy.
(6) In this section, a reference to the making of a copy of an eligible 
program is a reference to making a cinematograph film or sound 
recording of the broadcast of the eligible program, or a copy of 
such a film or sound recording.
135ZZZJ  Remuneration notices
(1) A satellite BSA licensee may, by written notice given to the 
relevant collecting society, undertake to pay equitable 
remuneration to the society for re-broadcasts of eligible programs 
broadcast by specified original broadcasters, where the eligible 
programs are re-broadcast by the satellite BSA licensee while the 
notice is in force.
  
Division 2  Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees
(2) A remuneration notice must specify that the amount of equitable 
remuneration is to be assessed on the basis of the records to be kept 
by the satellite BSA licensee under section 135ZZZL.
(3) A remuneration notice comes into force on:
(a) the day on which it is given to the collecting society; or
(b) such earlier day as is specified in the notice;
and remains in force until it is revoked.
135ZZZK  Amount of equitable remuneration
(1) If a satellite BSA licensee gives a remuneration notice to a 
collecting society, the amount of equitable remuneration payable to 
the collecting society for re-broadcasts of eligible programs by the 
satellite BSA licensee while the notice is in force is the amount:
(a) determined by agreement between the satellite BSA licensee 
and the collecting society; or
(b) failing such agreement—determined by the Copyright 
Tribunal on application made by either of them.
(2) If a determination has been made by the Copyright Tribunal under 
subsection (1), either:
(a) the satellite BSA licensee; or
(b) the collecting society;
may, at any time after 12 months from the day on which the 
determination was made, apply to the Tribunal under that 
subsection for a new determination of amounts payable to the 
collecting society by the satellite BSA licensee for re-broadcasts of 
eligible programs by the satellite BSA licensee.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), different amounts may be 
determined (whether by agreement or by the Copyright Tribunal) 
in relation to different classes of:
(a) works; or
(b) sound recordings; or
(c) cinematograph films;
included in re-broadcasts.
  
Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees  Division 2
135ZZZL  Record system
(1) If a remuneration notice is given to a collecting society by a 
satellite BSA licensee, the satellite BSA licensee must establish 
and maintain a record system.
(2) The record system must provide:
(a) for a record to be kept of the title of each eligible program 
that is:
(i) broadcast by an original broadcaster specified in the 
remuneration notice; and
(ii) re-broadcast by the satellite BSA licensee; and
(b) for the collecting society to have access to such a record.
(3) The record system must be:
(a) determined by agreement between the satellite BSA licensee 
and the collecting society; or
(b) failing such agreement—determined by the Copyright 
Tribunal on application made by either of them.
(4) Subsection (3) has effect subject to subsection (2).
135ZZZM  Revocation of remuneration notice
(1) A remuneration notice may be revoked at any time by the relevant 
satellite BSA licensee by written notice given to the collecting 
society to which the remuneration notice was given.
(2)  The revocation takes effect:
(a) at the end of 3 months after the date of the notice; or
(b) on such later day as is specified in the notice.
135ZZZN  Request for payment of equitable remuneration
(1) If a remuneration notice is or has been in force, the collecting 
society to which the notice was given may, by written notice given 
to the relevant satellite BSA licensee, request the satellite BSA 
licensee to pay to the society, within a reasonable time after the 
  
Division 2  Re-broadcasts by satellite BSA licensees
date of the notice, the amount of equitable remuneration specified 
in the notice.
(2) The amount specified in the notice must be an amount payable 
under section 135ZZZK for re-broadcasts made by the satellite 
BSA licensee while the remuneration notice is or was in force.
(3) Subsection (1) has effect subject to subsection (4).
(4) If an amount specified in a request under subsection (1) is not paid 
in accordance with the request, it may be recovered from the 
satellite BSA licensee by the collecting society in:
(a) the Federal Court of Australia; or
(b) any other court of competent jurisdiction;
as a debt due to the society.
  
Collecting societies  Division 3
Division 3—Collecting societies
135ZZZO  Collecting societies
(1) A body may apply to the Minister to be declared as a collecting 
society for:
(a) all relevant copyright owners; or
(b) specified classes of relevant copyright owners.
(2) After receiving the application, the Minister must do one of the 
following:
(a) by notice published in the Gazette, declare the body to be a 
collecting society;
(b) refuse to declare the body to be a collecting society;
(c) both:
(i) refer the application to the Copyright Tribunal in the 
way prescribed by the regulations; and
(ii)  notify the body of the referral.
(3) A declaration made under paragraph (2)(a) is not a legislative 
instrument.
(4) If the Minister refers the application to the Copyright Tribunal, the 
Tribunal may declare the body to be a collecting society.
Note: Section 153U sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the reference.
(5) A declaration of the body as a collecting society must declare the 
body to be:
(a) the collecting society for all relevant copyright owners; or
(b) the collecting society for classes of relevant copyright owners 
specified in the declaration.
(6) If:
(a) a body is declared to be the collecting society for a specified 
class of copyright owners; and
  
Division 3  Collecting societies
(b) another body is subsequently declared to be the collecting 
society for that class of copyright owners:
then:
(c) the first-mentioned collecting society ceases to be the 
collecting society for that class of copyright owners on the 
day on which the subsequent declaration is made; and
(d) any remuneration notice given to that collecting society 
ceases to be in force to the extent to which it relates to 
relevant copyright owners included in that class of copyright 
owners.
(7) The Minister and the Copyright Tribunal must not declare a body 
to be a collecting society unless:
(a) it is:
(i) registered as a company under Part 2A.2 of the 
Corporations Act 2001; and
(ii) a company limited by guarantee; and
(b) all persons who are included in a class of relevant copyright 
owners to be specified in the declaration, or their agents, are 
entitled to become its members; and
(c) its rules prohibit the payment of dividends to its members; 
and
(d) its rules contain such other provisions as are prescribed, 
where the provisions are necessary to ensure that the interests 
of members of the collecting society who are relevant 
copyright owners, or their agents, are protected adequately, 
including, in particular, provisions about:
(i) the collection of amounts of equitable remuneration 
payable under section 135ZZZK; and
(ii) the payment of the administrative costs of the collecting 
society out of amounts collected by it; and
(iii) the distribution of amounts collected by the collecting 
society; and
(iv) the holding on trust by the collecting society of amounts 
for relevant copyright owners who are not its members; 
and
  
Collecting societies  Division 3
(v) access to records of the collecting society by its 
members.
(8) If the Minister or the Copyright Tribunal has declared a body to be 
the collecting society for a specified class of copyright owners, the 
Minister and the Copyright Tribunal may refuse to declare another 
body to be the collecting society for that class of copyright owners 
unless satisfied that to do so would be in the interests of those 
copyright owners, having regard to:
(a) the number of members of the first-mentioned society; and
(b) the scope of its activities; and
(c) such other considerations as are relevant.
135ZZZP  Revocation of declaration
(1) This section applies if the Minister is satisfied that a body declared 
as a collecting society:
(a) is not functioning adequately as a collecting society; or
(b) is not acting in accordance with its rules or in the best 
interests of those of its members who are relevant copyright 
owners, or their agents; or
(c) has altered its rules so that they no longer comply with 
paragraphs 135ZZZO(7)(c) and (d); or
(d) has refused or failed, without reasonable excuse, to comply 
with section 135ZZZQ or 135ZZZR.
(2) The Minister may:
(a) by notice published in the Gazette, revoke the declaration; or
(b) refer the question whether the declaration should be revoked 
to the Copyright Tribunal in the way prescribed by the 
regulations.
(3) If the Minister refers the question to the Copyright Tribunal, the 
Tribunal may revoke the declaration if it is satisfied that any of 
paragraphs (1)(a), (b), (c) and (d) applies to the body.
Note: Section 153V sets out the procedure of the Copyright Tribunal in 
dealing with the reference.
  
Division 3  Collecting societies
135ZZZQ  Annual report and accounts
(1) A collecting society must, as soon as practicable after the end of 
each financial year, prepare a report of its operations during that 
financial year and send a copy of the report to the Minister.
(2) The Minister must cause a copy of the report sent to the Minister 
under subsection (1) to be tabled in each House of the Parliament 
within 15 sitting days of that House after the receipt of the report 
by the Minister.
(3) A collecting society must keep accounting records correctly 
recording and explaining:
(a) the transactions of the society (including any transactions as 
trustee); and
(b) the financial position of the society.
(4) The accounting records must be kept in such a manner as will 
enable:
(a) true and fair accounts of the society to be prepared from time 
to time; and
(b) those accounts to be conveniently and properly audited.
(5) A collecting society must, as soon as practicable after the end of 
each financial year:
(a) cause its accounts to be audited by an auditor who is not a 
member of the society; and
(b) send to the Minister a copy of its accounts as so audited.
(6) A collecting society must give its members reasonable access to 
copies of all reports and audited accounts prepared by it under this 
section.
(7) This section does not affect any obligations of a collecting society 
relating to the preparation and lodging of annual returns or 
accounts under the Corporations Act 2001.
(8) For the purposes of this section, the period:
(a) beginning at the commencement of this section; and
  
Collecting societies  Division 3
(b) ending at the end of 30 June 2010;
is taken to be a financial year.
135ZZZR  Amendment of rules
A collecting society must, within 21 days after it alters its rules, 
send a copy of the rules as so altered to the Minister, together with 
a statement setting out:
(a) the effect of the alteration; and
(b) the reasons why it was made.
135ZZZS  Applying to Tribunal for review of distribution 
arrangement
(1) A collecting society or a member of a collecting society may apply 
to the Copyright Tribunal for review of the arrangement adopted, 
or proposed to be adopted, by the collecting society for distributing 
amounts it collects in a period.
(2) If the Tribunal makes an order under section 153W varying the 
arrangement or substituting for it another arrangement, the 
arrangement reflecting the Tribunal’s order has effect as if it had 
been adopted in accordance with the collecting society’s rules, but 
does not affect a distribution started before the order was made.
  
Division 4  Interim re-broadcasts
Division 4—Interim re-broadcasts
135ZZZT  Appointment of notice holder
The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, appoint a 
person to be the notice holder for the purposes of this Division.
135ZZZU  Re-broadcast before declaration of collecting society
The copyright in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film 
included in a broadcast of an eligible program is not infringed by 
the re-broadcast of the eligible program if:
(a) the eligible program is re-broadcast by a satellite BSA 
licensee; and
(b) the eligible program is re-broadcast on a service authorised 
by the satellite BSA licensee’s satellite BSA licence; and
(c) the re-broadcast of the eligible program complies with the 
conditions of the satellite BSA licensee’s satellite BSA 
licence that are set out in clause 7A of Schedule 2 to the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992; and
(d) at the time the re-broadcast is made, a collecting society has 
not been declared; and
(e) a notice given by the satellite BSA licensee to the notice 
holder under subsection 135ZZZV(1) is in force; and
(f) the satellite BSA licensee complies with section 135ZZZL.
135ZZZV  Notices by satellite BSA licensees
(1) A satellite BSA licensee may, at any time before the declaration of 
the first collecting society, by written notice given to the notice 
holder by the satellite BSA licensee, undertake to pay equitable 
remuneration to a collecting society, when it is declared, for 
re-broadcasts of eligible programs by the satellite BSA licensee 
while the notice is in force.
  
Interim re-broadcasts  Division 4
(2) A notice must specify that the amount of equitable remuneration is 
to be assessed on the basis of the records to be kept by the satellite 
BSA licensee under section 135ZZZL.
(3) A notice comes into force on:
(a) the day on which it is given to the notice holder; or
(b) such later day as is specified in the notice;
and remains in force until it is revoked.
(4) A notice may be revoked at any time by the satellite BSA licensee 
by written notice given to the notice holder.
(5) The revocation takes effect:
(a) on the date of the notice of revocation; or
(b) on such later date as is specified in the notice of revocation.
135ZZZW  Record keeping requirements
If a satellite BSA licensee gives a notice to the notice holder under 
section 135ZZZV, sections 135ZZZK and 135ZZZL apply as if:
(a) references to a collecting society were references to the 
notice holder; and
(b) references to a remuneration notice were references to a 
notice under section 135ZZZV.
135ZZZX  Effect of declaration of collecting society
(1) If:
(a) as a result of the declaration of one or more collecting 
societies, there is a society for all relevant copyright owners; 
and
(b) a notice under section 135ZZZV was in force immediately 
before the day on which the declaration came into force;
then, on and after that day, the notice ceases to have effect as such 
a notice, but is taken, for the purposes of this Part, to be a 
remuneration notice that:
  
Division 4  Interim re-broadcasts
(c) was given by the relevant satellite BSA licensee to the 
collecting society, or to each of the collecting societies, as the 
case may be; and
(d) came into force on the same day as the notice came into 
force.
(2) If:
(a) one or more collecting societies are declared for one or more, 
but not for all, classes of relevant copyright owners; and
(b) a notice was in force immediately before the day on which 
the declaration came into force;
then, on and after that day:
(c) the notice ceases to have effect as such a notice in relation to 
the relevant copyright owners in the class or classes of 
copyright owners for whom a collecting society is declared, 
but is taken, for the purposes of this Part, to be a 
remuneration notice that:
(i) was given by the relevant satellite BSA licensee to the 
collecting society or to each of the collecting societies, 
as the case may be; and
(ii) came into force on the same day as the notice came into 
force; and
(d) the notice continues to have effect as such a notice in relation 
to all other relevant copyright owners.
(3) When a notice is, under this section, taken to be a remuneration 
notice, the relevant satellite BSA licensee must cause copies of all 
records made under section 135ZZZL on or after the day on which 
the notice is taken to have come into force to be sent to the relevant 
collecting society within 21 days after the declaration of the 
collecting society.
  
Miscellaneous  Division 5
Division 5—Miscellaneous
135ZZZY  Relevant copyright owner may authorise re-broadcast
(1) Nothing in this Part affects the right of the owner of the copyright 
in a broadcast of an eligible program to grant a licence authorising 
a satellite BSA licensee to re-broadcast the eligible program 
without infringing that copyright.
(2) Nothing in this Part affects the right of the owner of the copyright 
in a work, sound recording or cinematograph film included in a 
broadcast of an eligible program to grant a licence authorising a 
satellite BSA licensee to re-broadcast the eligible program without 
infringing that copyright.
135ZZZZ  Copyright not to vest under this Part
Despite any other provision of this Act, the re-broadcast of an 
eligible program that is not an infringement of copyright under this 
Part does not vest copyright in any work or other subject-matter in 
any person.
135ZZZZA  Licence to re-broadcast does not authorise copyright 
infringements
The owner of the copyright in a broadcast of an eligible program is 
not taken, for the purposes of this Act, to have authorised the 
infringement of copyright in any work, sound recording or 
cinematograph film included in the broadcast of the eligible 
program merely because the owner licenses the re-broadcast of the 
eligible program.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
Part VI—Copyright Tribunal of Australia
Division 1—Preliminary
136  Interpretation
(1) In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears:
Deputy President means a Deputy President of the Tribunal.
Judge means:
(a)  a Judge of a federal court or of the Supreme Court of a State 
or Territory; or
(b) a person who has the same designation and status as a Judge 
of a federal court.
licence means a licence granted by or on behalf of the owner or 
prospective owner of the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter to do an act comprised in the copyright.
licence scheme means a scheme (including anything in the nature 
of a scheme, whether called a scheme or tariff or called by any 
other name) formulated by a licensor or licensors and setting out 
the classes of cases in which the licensor or each of the licensors is 
willing, or the persons on whose behalf the licensor or each of the 
licensors acts are willing, to grant licences and the charges (if any) 
subject to payment of which, and the conditions subject to which, 
licences would be granted in those classes of cases.
licensor means a body corporate for which both the following 
conditions are met:
(a) the body is incorporated under a law in force in a State or 
Territory relating to companies;
(b) the body’s constitution:
(i) entitles any owner of copyright, or any owner of 
copyright of a specified kind, to become a member of 
the body; and
  
Preliminary  Division 1
(ii) requires the body to protect the interests of its members 
connected with copyright; and
(iii) provides that the main business of the body is granting 
licences; and
(iv) requires the body to distribute to its members the 
proceeds (after deduction of the body’s administrative 
expenses) from payments to the body for licences; and
(v) prevents the body from paying dividends.
member means a member of the Tribunal, and includes the 
President and a Deputy President.
order includes an interim order.
organization means an organization or association of persons 
whether corporate or unincorporate.
the President means the President of the Tribunal.
(2) In this Part:
(a) a reference to conditions is a reference to any conditions 
other than conditions relating to the payment of a charge;
(b) a reference to giving an opportunity to a person or 
organization of presenting a case is a reference to giving the 
person or organization an opportunity, at the option of the 
person or organization, of submitting representations in 
writing, or of being heard, or of submitting representations in 
writing and being heard;
(c) a reference to a person who requires a licence of a particular 
kind includes a reference to a person who holds a licence of 
that kind if the person will, at the expiration of the period for 
which the licence was granted, require a renewal of that 
licence or a grant of a further licence of the same kind; and
(d) a reference to proceedings for infringement of copyright 
includes a reference to a prosecution of an offence against 
Subdivision D of Division 5 of Part V.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
(3) For the purposes of this Part, a person shall not be taken not to 
require a licence to cause a sound recording to be heard in public 
by reason only of the operation of section 108.
137  Cases to which licence schemes apply
(1) For the purposes of this Part, a case shall, subject to the next 
succeeding subsection, be deemed to be a case to which a licence 
scheme applies if, in accordance with a licence scheme for the time 
being in operation, a licence would be granted in that case.
(2) For the purposes of this Part, where, in accordance with a licence 
scheme:
(a) the licences that would be granted would be subject to 
conditions by virtue of which particular matters would be 
excepted from the licences; and
(b) a case relates to one or more matters falling within such an 
exception;
that case shall be deemed not to be a case to which the scheme 
applies.
  
Constitution of the Tribunal  Division 2
Division 2—Constitution of the Tribunal
138  Constitution of Tribunal
The Copyright Tribunal established by the section for which this 
section was substituted by section 138 of the Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No. 1) 1982 continues in 
existence as the Copyright Tribunal of Australia but shall consist of 
a President, and such number of Deputy Presidents and other 
members as are appointed in accordance with this Division.
139  Appointment of members of Tribunal
A member of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the 
Governor-General.
140  Qualifications of members
(1) A person shall not be appointed as the President unless he or she is 
a Judge of the Federal Court of Australia.
(1A) A person is not to be appointed as a Deputy President unless he or 
she is, or has been, a Judge of a federal court or of the Supreme 
Court of a State or Territory.
(2) A person shall not be appointed as a member (other than the 
President or a Deputy President) unless:
(a) he or she is or has been a Judge;
(b) he or she is enrolled as a legal practitioner of the High Court, 
of another federal court or of the Supreme Court of a State or 
Territory and has been so enrolled for not less than 5 years;
(c) he or she has had experience, for not less than 5 years, at a 
high level in industry, commerce, business, public 
administration, education or the practice of a profession;
(d) he or she has obtained a degree of a university, or an 
educational qualification of a similar standing, after studies 
in the field of law, economics or public administration; or
  
Division 2  Constitution of the Tribunal
(e) he or she has, in the opinion of the Governor-General, special 
knowledge or skill relevant to the duties of a member.
141  Tenure of office
(1) Subject to this section, a member holds office for such period, not 
exceeding 7 years, as is specified in the instrument of his or her 
appointment, but is eligible for re-appointment.
(2) Where a member who is a Judge ceases to be a Judge, he or she 
ceases to hold office as a member, but he or she is eligible for 
appointment as a member (other than the President).
(3) The Governor-General may terminate the appointment of a 
member (other than a member who is a Judge) for physical or 
mental incapacity.
(4) The Governor-General shall terminate the appointment of a 
member (other than a member who is a Judge) if:
(a) the member is guilty of misbehaviour; or
(b) the member becomes bankrupt, applies to take the benefit of 
any law for the relief of bankrupt or insolvent debtors, 
compounds with his or her creditors or makes an assignment 
of his or her remuneration for their benefit.
141A  Seniority of Deputy Presidents
(1) The Deputy Presidents have seniority as Deputy Presidents 
according to the dates of their first appointment to the Tribunal, or, 
if 2 or more Deputy Presidents were appointed on the same day, 
according to the precedence assigned to them in their instruments 
of appointment.
(2) At any time when only one person is holding office as a Deputy 
President, any reference in this Part to ‘the senior Deputy 
President’ is to be taken to be a reference to the Deputy President.
  
Constitution of the Tribunal  Division 2
142  Acting President
The Governor-General may appoint the senior Deputy President 
available to act in the office of President:
(a) during a vacancy in that office; or
(b) during any period when the person holding that office is 
absent from duty or from Australia or is, for any other 
reason, unable to perform the functions of that office.
143  Remuneration and allowances
(1) Subject to this section, a member shall be paid such remuneration 
as is determined by the Remuneration Tribunal but, if no 
determination of that remuneration by the Tribunal is in operation, 
the member shall be paid such remuneration as is prescribed.
(2) A member shall be paid such allowances as are prescribed.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) have effect subject to the Remuneration 
Tribunal Act 1973.
(4) A member who is a Judge is not, while he or she receives salary or 
annual allowance as a Judge, entitled to remuneration under this 
Act.
144  Oath or affirmation of office
(1) A member shall, before proceeding to discharge the duties of his or 
her office, take an oath or make an affirmation in accordance with 
the form of oath or affirmation in the Schedule to this Act.
(2) An oath or affirmation shall be taken or made before a justice or 
judge of a federal court or of the Supreme Court of a State or 
Territory.
144A  Disclosure of interests by members
(1) Where a member is, or is to be, the Tribunal, or a member of the 
Tribunal, as constituted for the purposes of a proceeding and the 
  
Division 2  Constitution of the Tribunal
member has or acquires any interest, pecuniary or otherwise, that 
could conflict with the proper performance of his or her functions 
in relation to that proceeding:
(a) he or she shall disclose the interest to the parties to the 
proceeding; and
(b) except with the consent of all the parties to the proceeding, 
he or she shall not take part in the proceeding.
(2) Where the President becomes aware that a member is, or is to be, 
the Tribunal, or a member of the Tribunal, as constituted for the 
purposes of a proceeding and that the member has, in relation to 
that proceeding, such an interest as is mentioned under 
subsection (1):
(a) if the President considers that the member should not take 
part, or should not continue to take part, in the 
proceeding—he or she shall give a direction to the member 
accordingly; or
(b) in any other case—he or she shall cause the interest of the 
member to be disclosed to the parties to the proceeding.
(3) In this section, a reference to a proceeding includes a reference to a 
proceeding by way of an application or reference to the Tribunal 
under this Act.
144B  Removal from office for failure to disclose interest
Where the Governor-General is satisfied that a member (other than 
a member who is a Judge) has failed, without reasonable excuse, to 
make a disclosure that he or she is, under subsection 144A(1), 
required to make, the Governor-General shall remove that member 
from office.
145  Resignation
A member may resign the office of member by giving a signed 
notice of resignation to the Governor-General.
  
Constitution of the Tribunal  Division 2
146  Sittings of the Tribunal
(1) Sittings of the Tribunal shall be held at such places and times as 
the President determines.
(2) Subject to the next succeeding subsection, the Tribunal shall be 
constituted by a single member.
(3) If a party to an application or reference requests that the Tribunal 
be constituted by more than one member for the purposes of the 
application or reference, the Tribunal must, for the purposes of the 
application or reference, be constituted by not less than 2 members 
of whom one must be the President or a Deputy President.
(3A) Nothing in subsection (3) prevents a single member from 
exercising the powers of the Tribunal in relation to matters of 
procedure.
(4) At a proceeding before the Tribunal constituted by more than one 
member:
(a) if the President is one of the members constituting the 
Tribunal—he or she shall preside; and
(b) in any other case—the senior Deputy President who is 
present is to preside.
(5) Where the Tribunal constituted by more than one member is 
divided in opinion on a question, the question shall be decided 
according to the decision of the majority, if there is a majority, but 
if the Tribunal as so constituted is equally divided in opinion, the 
question shall be decided according to the opinion of the President 
or, if he or she is not one of the members constituting the Tribunal, 
according to the opinion of the senior Deputy President who is 
present.
(6) The Tribunal constituted by a member or members may sit and 
exercise the powers of the Tribunal notwithstanding that the 
Tribunal constituted by another member or other members is at the 
same time sitting and exercising those powers.
  
Division 2  Constitution of the Tribunal
(7) The exercise of the powers of the Tribunal is not affected by a 
vacancy or vacancies in the membership of the Tribunal.
(8) Where the hearing of any proceeding has been commenced before 
the Tribunal constituted by 2 or more members and one or more of 
those members has ceased to be a member or has ceased to be 
available for the purposes of the proceeding, the remaining 
member or members may continue the hearing of the proceeding if 
the remaining member, or one of the remaining members, is the 
President or a Deputy President.
147  President to arrange business of Tribunal
The President may give directions as to the arrangement of the 
business of the Tribunal and, subject to subsection 146(2) or (3), as 
to the constitution of the Tribunal for the purposes of particular 
proceedings.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
Division 3—Applications and references to the Tribunal
Subdivision B—Applications relating to Parts III and IV
149  Applications to Tribunal for determination of remuneration 
payable for making recording or film of a work
(1) This section applies where an application is made to the Tribunal 
in pursuance of subsection 47(3) or 70(3) for the determination of 
an equitable remuneration to be paid to the owner of the copyright 
in a work for the making of a sound recording or cinematograph 
film of the work or of an adaptation of the work.
(2) The parties to an application in relation to which this section 
applies are:
(a) the owner of the copyright in the work; and
(b) the maker of the recording or film.
(3) Where an application in relation to which this section applies is 
made to the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall consider the application 
and, after giving to the parties to the application an opportunity of 
presenting their cases, shall make an order determining the amount 
that it considers to be equitable remuneration to the owner of the 
copyright for the making of the recording or film.
150  Applications to Tribunal for determination of remuneration 
payable to owner of copyright in recording for making of 
a copy of the sound recording
(1) This section applies where an application is made to the Tribunal 
in pursuance of subsection 107(3) for the determination of an 
equitable remuneration to be paid to the owner of the copyright in a 
sound recording for the making of a copy of the sound recording.
(2) The parties to an application in relation to which this section 
applies are:
(a) the owner of the copyright in the sound recording; and
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(b) the maker of the copy of the sound recording.
(3) Where an application in relation to which this section applies is 
made to the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall consider the application 
and, after giving to the parties to the application an opportunity of 
presenting their cases, shall make an order determining the amount 
that it considers to be equitable remuneration to the owner of the 
copyright for the making of the copy of the sound recording.
151  Applications to Tribunal for determination of remuneration 
payable to owner of copyright in recording in respect of 
public playing of the recording
(1) This section applies where an application is made to the Tribunal 
in pursuance of subsection 108(1) for the determination of an 
equitable remuneration to be paid to the owner of the copyright in a 
sound recording for the causing of the recording to be heard in 
public.
(2) The parties to an application in relation to which this section 
applies are:
(a) the owner of the copyright in the recording; and
(b) the person who caused the recording to be heard in public.
(3) Where an application in relation to which this section applies is 
made to the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall consider the application 
and, after giving to the parties to the application an opportunity of 
presenting their cases, shall make an order determining the amount 
that it considers to be equitable remuneration to the owner of the 
copyright for the causing of the recording to be heard in public.
152  Applications to Tribunal for determination of amounts payable 
for broadcasting published sound recordings
(1) In this section, unless the contrary intention appears:
Australia does not include the external Territories other than 
Norfolk Island.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
broadcaster means:
(a) the Australian Broadcasting Corporation; or
(aa) the Special Broadcasting Service Corporation; or
(b) the holder of a licence allocated by the Australian 
Communications and Media Authority under the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992; or
(c) a person making a broadcast under the authority of a class 
licence determined by the Australian Communications and 
Media Authority under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992.
broadcasting does not include broadcasting by a transmission for a 
fee payable to the person who made the broadcast.
(1A) For the purposes of the application of this section in relation to a 
period before the commencement of this subsection, this section 
has effect as if any act or thing done during that period by the 
Australian Broadcasting Commission had been done by the 
Australian Broadcasting Corporation and any earnings of the 
Australian Broadcasting Commission during that period were 
earnings of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
(1B) In its application in relation to a period before the commencement 
of this subsection, this section has effect as if any act or thing done 
during that period by the Special Broadcasting Service had been 
done by the Special Broadcasting Service Corporation and any 
earnings of the Special Broadcasting Service during that period 
were earnings of the Special Broadcasting Service Corporation.
(2) Subject to this section, an application may be made to the Tribunal 
for an order determining, or making provision for determining, the 
amount payable by a broadcaster to the owners of copyrights in 
published sound recordings in respect of the broadcasting, during a 
period specified in the application, of those recordings by that 
broadcaster.
(3) An application under the last preceding subsection may be made by 
the broadcaster or by the owner of a copyright in a published sound 
recording.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(4) The parties to an application under subsection (2) are:
(a) the person making the application; and
(b) such organizations or persons as apply to the Tribunal to be 
made parties to the application and, in accordance with the 
next succeeding subsection, are made parties to the 
application.
(5) Where an organization (whether claiming to be representative of 
broadcasters or of the owners of copyrights in published sound 
recordings or not) or a person (whether a broadcaster or the owner 
of a copyright in a published sound recording or not) applies to the 
Tribunal to be made a party to an application under this section, 
and the Tribunal is satisfied that the organization or person has a 
substantial interest in the matter that is the subject of the 
application, the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, make that 
organization or person a party to the application.
(6) The Tribunal shall consider an application under subsection (2) 
and, after giving the parties to the application an opportunity of 
presenting their cases, shall make an order:
(a) determining, or making provision for determining, the 
amount payable by the broadcaster to the owners of 
copyrights in published sound recordings in respect of the 
broadcasting, during the period to which the order applies, by 
the broadcaster of those recordings;
(b) specifying as the persons among whom that amount is to be 
divided such of the persons who were, or were represented 
by, parties to the application as the Tribunal is satisfied are 
the owners of copyrights in published sound recordings; and
(c) specifying as the respective shares in that amount of the 
persons among whom that amount is to be divided and as the 
times at which those shares are to be paid such shares and 
times as those persons agree or, in default of agreement, as 
the Tribunal thinks equitable.
(7) In so making an order in relation to a broadcaster, the Tribunal 
shall take into account all relevant matters, including the extent to 
which the broadcaster uses, for the purposes of broadcasting, 
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
records embodying sound recordings (other than recordings in 
relation to which section 105 applies) in which copyrights subsist, 
being copyrights owned by persons who are, or are represented by, 
parties to the application.
(8) The Tribunal must not make an order that would require a 
broadcaster who is:
(a) the holder of a licence allocated by the Australian 
Communications and Media Authority under the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992 that authorises the holder to 
broadcast radio programs; or
(b) a person authorised by a class licence determined by that 
Authority under that Act to broadcast radio programs;
to pay, in respect of the broadcasting of published sound 
recordings during the period covered by the order, an amount 
exceeding 1% of the amount determined by the Tribunal to be the 
gross earnings of the broadcaster during the period equal to the 
period covered by the order that ended on the last 30 June that 
occurred before the period covered by the order.
(9) If a broadcaster that is:
(a) the holder of a licence allocated by the Australian 
Communications and Media Authority under the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992 that authorises the holder to 
broadcast radio programs; or
(b) a person authorised by a class licence determined by that 
Authority under that Act to broadcast radio programs;
has, with the permission of that Authority, adopted an accounting 
period ending on a day other than 30 June, the reference in 
subsection (8) to 30 June is, in relation to that broadcaster, a 
reference to that other day.
(10) Subsection (8) does not apply to an order in relation to a 
broadcaster unless:
(a) the broadcaster establishes to the satisfaction of the Tribunal 
the amount of the gross earnings of the broadcaster during 
the period in respect of which those earnings are to be 
determined; and
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(b) the broadcaster carried on the transmission of programmes by 
way of sound broadcasting throughout the whole of that 
period.
(11) Where an application is made to the Tribunal under subsection (2) 
in relation to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, the 
Tribunal:
(a) shall make separate orders in respect of sound broadcasts by 
the Corporation of published sound recordings and in respect 
of television broadcasts by the Corporation of such 
recordings; and
(b) shall not make an order that would require the Corporation to 
pay, in respect of sound broadcasts of published sound 
recordings during the period in relation to which the order 
applies, an amount exceeding the sum of:
(i) in respect of each complete year included in that period 
the amount ascertained by multiplying one-half of One 
cent by the number equal to the number of persons 
comprised in the estimated population of Australia as 
last set out in statistics published by the Commonwealth 
Statistician before the making of the order; and
(ii) in respect of each part of a year included in that 
period—the amount that bears to the amount ascertained 
in accordance with the last preceding subparagraph in 
relation to a complete year the same proportion as that 
part of a year bears to a complete year.
(12) A person who is not specified in an order in force under 
subsection (6) as one of the persons among whom the amount 
specified in, or determined in accordance with, the order is to be 
divided may, before the expiration of the period to which the order 
applies, apply to the Tribunal for an amendment of the order so as 
to specify him or her as one of those persons.
(13) The parties to an application under the last preceding subsection 
for an amendment of an order are:
(a) the person making the application;
(b) the broadcaster in relation to whom the order applies;
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(c) the persons specified in the order as the persons among 
whom the amount specified in, or determined in accordance 
with, the order is to be divided; and
(d) such organizations or persons as apply to the Tribunal to be 
made parties to the application and, in accordance with 
subsection (5), are made parties to the application.
(14) The Tribunal shall consider an application under subsection (12) 
for an amendment of an order in force under subsection (6) (in this 
subsection referred to as the principal order) and, after giving the 
parties to the application an opportunity of presenting their cases, 
shall, if it is satisfied that the applicant is the owner of the 
copyright or copyrights in one or more published sound recordings, 
make an order amending the principal order so as to:
(a) specify the applicant as one of the persons among whom the 
amount specified in, or determined in accordance with, the 
principal order is to be divided; and
(b) specify as the share of the applicant in that amount and as the 
times at which that share is to be paid such share and times as 
the applicant and the other persons among whom that amount 
is to be divided agree or, in default of agreement, as the 
Tribunal thinks equitable and make any consequential 
alterations in respect of the shares of those other persons.
(15) An order of the Tribunal made under subsection (6) in relation to a 
broadcaster applies in relation to the period commencing on the 
date specified in the order and ending on 30 June next succeeding 
the date of making of the order.
(16) The date that may be so specified in an order of the Tribunal made 
under subsection (6) in relation to a broadcaster may be a date 
before the date of making of the order or before the date of making 
of the application but shall not be a date before the date of 
expiration of the period in relation to which the last preceding 
order (if any) of the Tribunal made under that subsection in 
relation to that broadcaster applied or before the date of 
commencement of this Act.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(17) An order of the Tribunal made under subsection (14) amending an 
order of the Tribunal made under subsection (6) applies in relation 
to the period commencing on the date of making of the amending 
order and ending on the date of expiration of the period in relation 
to which the order that is being amended applies.
(18) Where an order of the Tribunal is in force under this section, the 
broadcaster in relation to whom the order applies is liable to pay to 
each of the persons specified in the order as the persons among 
whom the amount specified in, or determined in accordance with, 
the order is to be divided the share so specified in relation to that 
person and is so liable to pay that share at the times so specified 
and that person may recover any amount that is not paid in 
accordance with the order in a court of competent jurisdiction from 
the broadcaster as a debt due to the person.
(19) For the purposes of this section, the gross earnings of a broadcaster 
in respect of a period are the gross earnings of the broadcaster 
during that period in respect of the broadcasting by the broadcaster 
of advertisements or other matter, including the gross earnings of 
the broadcaster during that period in respect of the provision by the 
broadcaster of, or otherwise in respect of, matter broadcast by the 
broadcaster.
(20) Where, in connexion with a transaction, any consideration is paid 
or given otherwise than in cash, the money value of that 
consideration shall, for the purposes of the last preceding 
subsection, be deemed to have been paid or given.
(21) Where the Tribunal is of the opinion that:
(a) an amount, or part of an amount, earned during any period by 
a person other than a broadcaster would, if the broadcaster 
and that person were the same person, form part of the gross 
earnings of the broadcaster in respect of that period for the 
purposes of this section; and
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(b) a relationship exists between the broadcaster and the other 
person (whether by reason of any shareholding or of any 
agreement or arrangement, or for any other reason) of such a 
kind that the amount or the part of the amount, as the case 
may be, should, for the purposes of this section, be treated as 
part of the gross earnings of the broadcaster in respect of that 
period;
the Tribunal may so treat the amount or the part of the amount, as 
the case may be.
152A  Applications to Tribunal for determination of amount of 
royalty payable for recording musical works
(1) In this section:
manufacturer has the same meaning as in section 55.
(2) Subject to this section, an application may be made to the Tribunal 
for an order determining, or making provision for determining, the 
amount of royalty payable by the manufacturer of a record of a 
musical work to the owner of the copyright in the work during a 
period specified in the application.
(3) An application may be made by the manufacturer or the owner of 
the copyright in the musical work recorded by the manufacturer.
(4) The parties to an application are:
(a) the manufacturer and the owner of the copyright in the 
musical work; and
(b) any organisations or persons who are made parties to the 
application.
(5) Where an application is made under subsection (2), the Tribunal 
shall consider the application and, after giving the parties an 
opportunity of presenting their cases, make an order determining, 
or making provision for determining, an equitable amount of 
royalty payable by the manufacturer of the record of the musical 
work to the owner of the copyright in the work during the period 
specified in the order.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(6) Where an organisation (whether claiming to represent 
manufacturers or the owners of copyrights in musical works or not) 
or a person (whether a manufacturer or the owner of the copyright 
in a musical work or not) applies to the Tribunal to be made a party 
to an application under this section, the Tribunal may, if it thinks 
fit, make that organisation or person a party to the application if the 
Tribunal is satisfied that the organisation or person has a 
substantial interest in the application.
(7) The period that may be specified in an order under subsection (5) 
in relation to a manufacturer may be a period beginning before the 
date of making of the order or before the date of making of the 
application but shall not be a period beginning before:
(a) the end of the period specified in the last preceding order (if 
any) made under that subsection in relation to that 
manufacturer; or
(b) the commencement of this section.
(8) Where an order is in force under this section, the manufacturer in 
relation to whom the order applies is liable to pay to the person 
specified in the order the amount of royalty so specified at the 
times so specified and that person may recover the amount, if it is 
not paid in accordance with the order, in a court of competent 
jurisdiction from the manufacturer as a debt due to the person.
152B  Applications to Tribunal for determination of manner of 
paying royalty
(1) In this section:
manufacturer has the same meaning as in section 55.
(2) An application may be made to the Tribunal for an order 
determining the manner in which amounts of royalty payable by 
the manufacturer of a record of a musical work to the owner of the 
copyright in the work are to be paid.
(3) An application may be made by the manufacturer or the owner of 
the copyright in the musical work recorded by the manufacturer.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(4) The parties to an application are:
(a) the manufacturer and the owner of the copyright in the 
musical work; and
(b) any organisations or persons who are made parties to the 
application.
(5) Where an organisation (whether claiming to represent 
manufacturers or the owners of copyrights in musical works or not) 
or a person (whether a manufacturer or the owner of the copyright 
in a musical work or not) applies to the Tribunal to be made a party 
to an application under this section, the Tribunal may, if it thinks 
fit, make that organisation or person a party to the application if the 
Tribunal is satisfied that the organisation or person has a 
substantial interest in the application.
(6) Where an application is made under subsection (2), the Tribunal 
shall consider the application and, after giving the parties an 
opportunity of presenting their cases, make an order determining 
the manner in which amounts of royalty payable by the 
manufacturer of the record of the musical work to the owner of the 
copyright in the work are to be paid.
153  Applications to Tribunal for apportionment of royalty in respect 
of a record
(1) This section applies where an application is made to the Tribunal 
in pursuance of paragraph 59(3)(b) for an apportionment of an 
amount payable in respect of a record between the owner of the 
copyright in a musical work and the owner of the copyright in a 
literary or dramatic work.
(2) The parties to an application in relation to which this section 
applies are:
(a) the owner of the copyright in the musical work; and
(b) the owner of the copyright in the literary or dramatic work.
(3) Where an application in relation to which this section applies is 
made to the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall consider the application 
and, after giving to the parties to the application an opportunity of 
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
presenting their cases, shall make an order apportioning the amount 
to which the application relates between the parties in such manner 
as it thinks equitable.
Subdivision C—Applications and referrals relating to Part IVA
153A  Applications and referrals relating to Division 4 of Part IVA
(1) This section applies to an application or referral to the Tribunal 
mentioned in column 1 of an item of the table in subsection (4).
(2) The parties to the application or referral are the parties mentioned 
in column 2 of the item.
(3) The Tribunal must:
(a) consider the application or referral; and
(b) give the parties the opportunity to present their cases; and
(c) comply with column 3 of the item.
(4) This is the table:
Applications and referrals relating to licensed copying and communicating
Item Column 1
Application or 
referral
Column 2
Parties
Column 3
The Tribunal must …
1 an application made 
under 
paragraph 113P(4)(b) 
or 113S(4)(b) to 
determine a question
(a) the relevant 
collecting society; 
and
(b) the body 
administering the 
relevant 
educational 
institution
having regard to any 
matters prescribed by the 
regulations, determine 
the relevant question 
under subsection 113P(4) 
or 113S(4).
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
Applications and referrals relating to licensed copying and communicating
Item Column 1
Application or 
referral
Column 2
Parties
Column 3
The Tribunal must …
2 an application made 
under 
paragraph 113R(2)(b) 
to determine an amount 
of equitable 
remuneration
(a) the relevant 
collecting society; 
and
(b) the body 
administering the 
relevant 
educational 
institution
having regard to any 
matters prescribed by the 
regulations, determine 
the amount of equitable 
remuneration under 
subsection 113R(2).
3 a referral under 
paragraph 113V(2)(c) 
of an application by a 
body (the applicant) to 
be declared to be a 
collecting society
(a) the applicant; and
(b) any person made 
a party under 
subsection (5) of 
this section
(a) declare the applicant 
to be a collecting 
society under 
subsection 113V(3); 
or
(b) refuse to declare the 
applicant to be a 
collecting society.
4 a referral under 
paragraph 113X(2)(b) 
of the question whether 
a declaration of a body 
to be a collecting 
society should be 
revoked
(a) the Minister; and
(b) the body; and
(c) any person made a 
party under 
subsection (5) of 
this section
(a) revoke the declaration 
under 
subsection 113X(3); 
or
(b) refuse to revoke the 
declaration.
5 an application under 
subsection 113ZB(1) 
for review of the 
arrangement adopted, 
or proposed to be 
adopted, by a 
collecting society for 
distributing amounts it 
collects in a period
(a) the applicant for 
the review; and
(b) the collecting 
society (if it is not 
the applicant); 
and
(c) any member or 
organization made 
a party under 
subsection (5) of 
this section
make an order under 
subsection 113ZB(2).
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(5) For the purposes of column 2 of item 3, 4 or 5 of the table, the 
Tribunal may make the following person or organization a party to 
the referral or application if the person or organization asks to be 
made a party:
(a) in the case of item 3 or 4—a person the Tribunal thinks has a 
sufficient interest in the matter;
(b) in the case of item 5—a person or organization that:
(i) the Tribunal thinks has a substantial interest in the 
arrangement; and
(ii) is a member of the collecting society, or is an 
organization that claims to be representative of 
members of the collecting society.
Subdivision E—Applications relating to Part VII
153DF  Meaning of copyright material
In this Subdivision:
copyright material has the same meaning as in Division 2 of 
Part VII.
153E  Applications to Tribunal under subsection 183(5)
(1) The parties to an application to the Tribunal under 
subsection 183(5) for the fixing of the terms for the doing of an act 
comprised in a copyright where the act is done for the services of 
the Commonwealth or a State are:
(a) the Commonwealth or the State, as the case may be; and
(b) the owner of the copyright.
(2) If an application is made to the Tribunal under subsection 183(5), 
the Tribunal is to consider the application and, after giving the 
parties to the application an opportunity of presenting their cases, 
is to make an order fixing the terms for the doing of the act.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
153F  Applications to Tribunal to declare collecting society for 
government copies
(1) A company limited by guarantee may apply to the Tribunal for a 
declaration that the company be a collecting society for the 
purposes of Division 2 of Part VII.
(2) The parties to the application are the applicant and any person 
made a party by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal may make a person a party if:
(a) the person asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal thinks that the person has a sufficient interest in 
either or both of the following questions:
(i) whether the applicant should be declared to be a 
collecting society;
(ii) whether any current declaration of a company as a 
collecting society should be revoked.
(4) After giving each party an opportunity of presenting its case, the 
Tribunal must:
(a) declare the applicant to be a collecting society for the 
purposes of Division 2 of Part VII; or
(b) reject the application.
(5) A declaration of a company as a collecting society for the purposes 
of Division 2 of Part VII may be a declaration in relation to:
(a) all government copies; or
(b) a specified class of government copies.
(6) The Tribunal may only declare the applicant to be a collecting 
society if the Tribunal is satisfied:
(a) that the applicant is a company limited by guarantee 
incorporated under a law in force in a State or Territory 
relating to companies; and
(b) in the case of an application for a declaration in relation to all 
government copies, that the applicant’s rules permit the 
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
owner, or the agent of the owner, of the copyright in any 
copyright material to become a member; and
(c) in the case of an application for a declaration in relation to a 
class of government copies, that the applicant’s rules permit 
the owner, or the agent of the owner, of the copyright in any 
copyright material a reproduction of which in accordance 
with section 183 would be within that class to become a 
member; and
(d) that the applicant’s rules prohibit the payment of dividends to 
its members; and
(e) that the applicant’s rules contain such provisions about all of 
the following matters as are adequate for the protection of its 
members:
(i) the collection of remuneration payable under 
section 183A;
(ii) the payment of administrative costs of the collecting 
society out of remuneration it collects;
(iii) the distribution of remuneration the collecting society 
collects;
(iv) the collecting society holding on trust remuneration for 
owners of copyright in copyright material who are not 
members of the society;
(v) access to the collecting society’s records by its 
members; and
(f) that the applicant’s rules contain such other provisions as are 
required by the regulations to be included for the protection 
of members of the society.
(7) A declaration must specify the day on which it takes effect.
(8) If the Tribunal makes a declaration under this section, the Registrar 
must publish the declaration in the Gazette.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
153G  Applications to Tribunal to revoke a declaration of a collecting 
society
(1) Any of the following persons may apply to the Tribunal for the 
revocation of a declaration under section 153F:
(a) the collecting society;
(b) a member of the collecting society;
(c) a government.
(2) The parties to an application are:
(a) the applicant for revocation of the declaration; and
(b) if the collecting society is not the applicant for revocation of 
the declaration—the collecting society; and
(c) any person made a party by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal may make a person a party if:
(a) the person asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal thinks that the person has a sufficient interest in 
the question whether the declaration of the collecting society 
should be revoked.
(4) After giving each party an opportunity of presenting its case, the 
Tribunal must:
(a) revoke the declaration of the collecting society; or
(b) reject the application.
(5) The Tribunal may only revoke the declaration of a company as the 
collecting society if the Tribunal is satisfied that the company:
(a) is not functioning adequately as the collecting society; or
(b) is not acting in accordance with its rules or in the best 
interests of its members who own copyright in copyright 
material or who are agents of copyright owners; or
(c) has altered its rules so that they no longer comply with any 
one or more of paragraphs 153F(6)(b) to (f); or
(d) has contravened section 183D or 183E (dealing with 
reporting and accounting, and alteration of rules).
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(6) A revocation must specify the day on which it takes effect.
(7) If the Tribunal revokes the declaration of the collecting society, the 
Registrar must publish notice of the revocation in the Gazette.
153H  Time limit for deciding applications under section 153F or 
153G
(1) The Tribunal must make its decision on an application under 
section 153F or 153G within 6 months after the conclusion of the 
hearing of the application.
(2) The 6 months time limit in subsection (1) does not apply if the 
Tribunal thinks that the matter cannot be dealt with properly within 
that period of 6 months, whether because of its complexity or 
because of other special circumstances.
(3) If subsection (2) applies, the Tribunal must tell the applicant before 
the end of the 6 months period that the matter cannot be dealt with 
properly within that period.
153J  Amendment and revocation of a declaration on the declaration 
of another collecting society
(1) If:
(a) a declaration (the previous declaration) is in force under 
section 153F; and
(b) the Tribunal, under that section, declares another company to 
be the collecting society for the purposes of Division 2 of 
Part VII in relation to a class of government copies that 
includes some of the government copies to which the 
previous declaration relates;
the Tribunal must amend the previous declaration so as to exclude 
from the government copies to which it relates all government 
copies to which the declaration of the company referred to in 
paragraph (b) relates.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(2) An amendment of a declaration under subsection (1) takes effect 
when the declaration of the company referred to in 
paragraph (1)(b) takes effect.
(3) If:
(a) a declaration (the previous declaration) is in force under 
section 153F; and
(b) the Tribunal makes another declaration under that section in 
relation to:
(i) all government copies; or
(ii) a class of government copies that includes all 
government copies to which the previous declaration 
relates;
the Tribunal must revoke the previous declaration.
(4) The revocation of a declaration under subsection (3) takes effect 
when the declaration referred to in paragraph (3)(b) takes effect.
(5) The Registrar must publish in the Gazette notice of an amendment 
or revocation made under this section.
153K  Applications to Tribunal for method of working out payment 
for government copies
(1) A collecting society or a government may apply to the Tribunal for 
an order determining the method for working out remuneration 
payable under subsection 183A(2) for government copies made for 
the services of the government in a particular period.
(2) The parties to an application are the collecting society and the 
government.
(3) After giving each party an opportunity of presenting its case, the 
Tribunal must make an order determining the method.
Note: Subsection 183A(3) sets out matters that the method must provide for. 
Subsection 183A(4) sets out matters that the method may provide for.
(4) An order may also specify how and when payments of the amount 
worked out using the method determined are to be made.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
153KA  Review of collecting society’s distribution arrangement
(1) This section has effect if an application is made to the Tribunal 
under section 183F for review of an arrangement adopted, or 
proposed to be adopted, by a collecting society for distributing 
amounts it collects in a period.
(2) The parties to the application are:
(a) the applicant; and
(b) the collecting society (if it is not the applicant); and
(c) a member of the collecting society, or an organization 
claiming to be representative of members of the collecting 
society, that the Tribunal makes a party to the application.
(3) The Tribunal may make a member of the collecting society, or an 
organization claiming to be representative of members of the 
collecting society, a party to the application if:
(a) the member or organization asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that the member or organization has 
a substantial interest in the arrangement.
(4) The Tribunal must consider the application, give the parties an 
opportunity of presenting their cases then make an order:
(a) confirming the arrangement; or
(b) varying the arrangement; or
(c) substituting for the arrangement another arrangement for 
distributing amounts the collecting society collects in the 
period.
(5) In this section:
collecting society has the same meaning as in Division 2 of 
Part VII.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
Subdivision G—Applications and references relating to 
Part VC
153M  Applications to the Tribunal under subsection 135ZZM(1)
(1) The parties to an application to the Tribunal under 
subsection 135ZZM(1) for the determination of the amount of 
equitable remuneration payable to a collecting society by a 
retransmitter for the making, by or on behalf of the retransmitter, 
of a retransmission of a free-to-air broadcast are the society and the 
retransmitter.
(2) On an application to the Tribunal under subsection 135ZZM(1), the 
Tribunal must consider the application and, after giving the parties 
an opportunity to present their cases, make an order determining 
the amount that it considers to be equitable remuneration for the 
making of retransmissions of free-to-air broadcasts.
(3) In making an order, the Tribunal may have regard to such matters 
(if any) as are prescribed.
(4) An order may be expressed to have effect in relation to 
retransmissions of free-to-air broadcasts made in reliance on 
section 135ZZK before the day on which the order is made.
(5) In this section, collecting society and retransmitter have the same 
meanings as in Part VC.
153N  Applications to Tribunal under subsection 135ZZN(3)
(1) The parties to an application to the Tribunal under 
subsection 135ZZN(3) for the determination of a record system are 
the collecting society and the retransmitter concerned.
(2) On an application to the Tribunal under subsection 135ZZN(3), the 
Tribunal must consider the application and, after giving the parties 
an opportunity to present their cases, make an order determining 
the record system.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(3) In this section, collecting society and retransmitter have the same 
meanings as in Part VC.
153P  References relating to declaration of collecting society
(1) This section has effect if the Minister refers to the Copyright 
Tribunal under section 135ZZT an application of a body to be 
declared a collecting society.
(2) The parties to the reference are the applicant and any person made 
a party by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal may make a person a party if:
(a) the person asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal thinks that the person has a sufficient interest in 
either or both of the following questions:
(i) whether the applicant should be declared to be a 
collecting society for all relevant copyright owners (as 
defined in Part VC) or a particular class of relevant 
copyright owners;
(ii) whether another body should cease to be the collecting 
society for any of the relevant copyright owners (as 
defined in Part VC) if the applicant is declared to be a 
collecting society.
(4) After giving each party an opportunity of presenting its case, the 
Tribunal must:
(a) declare the applicant to be a collecting society under 
section 135ZZT; or
(b) reject the application.
(5) If the Tribunal declares the applicant to be the collecting society 
under section 135ZZT, the Registrar must publish notice of the 
declaration in the Gazette.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
153Q  References relating to revocation of declaration of collecting 
society
(1) This section has effect if the Minister refers to the Copyright 
Tribunal under section 135ZZU the question whether the 
declaration of a body as a collecting society should be revoked.
(2) The parties to the reference are:
(a) the Minister; and
(b) the collecting society; and
(c) any person made a party by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal may make a person a party if:
(a) the person asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal thinks that the person has a sufficient interest in 
the question whether the declaration of the collecting society 
should be revoked.
(4) After giving each party an opportunity of presenting its case, the 
Tribunal must:
(a) revoke the declaration of the collecting society under 
section 135ZZU; or
(b) refuse to revoke the declaration.
(5) If the Tribunal revokes the declaration of the collecting society:
(a) the revocation must specify the day on which it takes effect; 
and
(b) the Registrar must publish notice of the revocation in the 
Gazette.
153R  Review of collecting society’s distribution arrangement
(1) This section has effect if an application is made to the Tribunal 
under section 135ZZWA for review of an arrangement adopted, or 
proposed to be adopted, by a collecting society for distributing 
amounts it collects in a period.
(2) The parties to the application are:
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(a) the applicant; and
(b) the collecting society (if it is not the applicant); and
(c) a member of the collecting society, or an organization 
claiming to be representative of members of the collecting 
society, that the Tribunal makes a party to the application.
(3) The Tribunal may make a member of the collecting society, or an 
organization claiming to be representative of members of the 
collecting society, a party to the application if:
(a) the member or organization asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that the member or organization has 
a substantial interest in the arrangement.
(4) The Tribunal must consider the application, give the parties an 
opportunity of presenting their cases then make an order:
(a) confirming the arrangement; or
(b) varying the arrangement; or
(c) substituting for the arrangement another arrangement for 
distributing amounts the collecting society collects in the 
period.
(5) In this section:
collecting society has the same meaning as in Part VC.
Subdivision GA—Applications and references relating to 
Part VD
153RA  Application to the Tribunal to determine amount payable to 
owner of copyright in a broadcast
(1) Either:
(a) a satellite BSA licensee; or
(b) a person (the copyright owner) who is, or will be, the owner 
of the copyright in the broadcast of an eligible program;
may apply to the Tribunal for an order determining the amount 
payable by the satellite BSA licensee to the copyright owner for 
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
the re-broadcast by the satellite BSA licensee, during the period 
specified in the application, of eligible programs, where the 
copyright owner owns the copyright in the broadcast of the eligible 
programs.
(2) The parties to an application under subsection (1) are:
(a) the satellite BSA licensee; and
(b) the copyright owner.
(3) On an application to the Tribunal under subsection (1), the 
Tribunal must consider the application and, after giving the parties 
an opportunity to present their cases, make an order determining 
the amount that it considers to be equitable remuneration for 
re-broadcasts of eligible programs during the period specified in 
the order, where the copyright owner owns the copyright in the 
broadcast of the eligible programs.
(4) In this section:
eligible program has the same meaning as in Part VD.
153S  Applications to the Tribunal under 
paragraph 135ZZZK(1)(b)—equitable remuneration
(1) The parties to an application to the Tribunal under 
paragraph 135ZZZK(1)(b) for the determination of the amount of 
equitable remuneration payable to a collecting society by a satellite 
BSA licensee for re-broadcasts by the satellite BSA licensee of 
eligible programs are:
(a) the society; and
(b) the satellite BSA licensee.
(2) On an application to the Tribunal under paragraph 135ZZZK(1)(b), 
the Tribunal must consider the application and, after giving the 
parties an opportunity to present their cases, make an order 
determining the amount that it considers to be equitable 
remuneration for the re-broadcast of eligible programs.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(3) In making an order, the Tribunal may have regard to such matters 
(if any) as are prescribed.
(4) An order may be expressed to have effect in relation to 
re-broadcasts of eligible programs in reliance on section 135ZZZI 
before the day on which the order is made.
(5) In this section:
collecting society has the same meaning as in Part VD.
eligible program has the same meaning as in Part VD.
153T  Applications to Tribunal under paragraph 135ZZZL(3)(b)—
record system
(1) The parties to an application to the Tribunal under 
paragraph 135ZZZL(3)(b) for the determination of a record system 
are:
(a) the collecting society concerned; and
(b) the satellite BSA licensee concerned.
(2) On an application to the Tribunal under paragraph 135ZZZL(3)(b), 
the Tribunal must consider the application and, after giving the 
parties an opportunity to present their cases, make an order 
determining the record system.
(3) In this section:
collecting society has the same meaning as in Part VD.
153U  References relating to declaration of collecting society
(1) This section has effect if the Minister refers to the Copyright 
Tribunal under section 135ZZZO an application of a body to be 
declared a collecting society.
(2) The parties to the reference are the applicant and any person made 
a party by the Tribunal.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(3) The Tribunal may make a person a party if:
(a) the person asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal thinks that the person has a sufficient interest in 
either or both of the following questions:
(i) whether the applicant should be declared to be a 
collecting society for all relevant copyright owners (as 
defined in Part VD) or a particular class of relevant 
copyright owners;
(ii) whether another body should cease to be the collecting 
society for any of the relevant copyright owners (as 
defined in Part VD) if the applicant is declared to be a 
collecting society.
(4) After giving each party an opportunity to present its case, the 
Tribunal must:
(a) declare the applicant to be a collecting society under 
section 135ZZZO; or
(b) reject the application.
(5) If the Tribunal declares the applicant to be the collecting society 
under section 135ZZZO, the Registrar must publish notice of the 
declaration in the Gazette.
153V  References relating to revocation of declaration of collecting 
society
(1) This section has effect if the Minister refers to the Copyright 
Tribunal under paragraph 135ZZZP(2)(b) the question whether the 
declaration of a body as a collecting society should be revoked.
(2) The parties to the reference are:
(a) the Minister; and
(b) the collecting society; and
(c) any person made a party by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal may make a person a party if:
(a) the person asks to be made a party; and
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(b) the Tribunal thinks that the person has a sufficient interest in 
the question whether the declaration of the collecting society 
should be revoked.
(4) After giving each party an opportunity to present its case, the 
Tribunal must:
(a) revoke the declaration of the collecting society under 
subsection 135ZZZP(3); or
(b) refuse to revoke the declaration.
(5) If the Tribunal revokes the declaration of the collecting society:
(a) the revocation must specify the day on which it takes effect; 
and
(b) the Registrar must publish notice of the revocation in the 
Gazette.
153W  Review of collecting society’s distribution arrangement
(1) This section has effect if an application is made to the Tribunal 
under section 135ZZZS for review of an arrangement adopted, or 
proposed to be adopted, by a collecting society for distributing 
amounts it collects in a period.
(2) The parties to the application are:
(a) the applicant; and
(b) the collecting society (if it is not the applicant); and
(c) a member of the collecting society, or an organisation 
claiming to be representative of members of the collecting 
society, that the Tribunal makes a party to the application.
(3) The Tribunal may make a member of the collecting society, or an 
organisation claiming to be representative of members of the 
collecting society, a party to the application if:
(a) the member or organisation asks to be made a party; and
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that the member or organisation has a 
substantial interest in the arrangement.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(4) The Tribunal must consider the application, give the parties an 
opportunity to present their cases then make an order:
(a) confirming the arrangement; or
(b) varying the arrangement; or
(c) substituting for the arrangement another arrangement for 
distributing amounts the collecting society collects in the 
period.
(5) In this section:
collecting society has the same meaning as in Part VD.
Subdivision H—References and applications relating to licences 
and licence schemes
154  Reference of proposed licence schemes to Tribunal
(1) Where a licensor proposes to bring a licence scheme into 
operation, he or she may refer the scheme to the Tribunal.
(2) The parties to a reference under this section are:
(a) the licensor referring the scheme; and
(b) such organizations or persons (if any) as apply to the 
Tribunal to be made parties to the reference and, in 
accordance with the next succeeding subsection, are made 
parties to the reference; and
(c) the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, if 
the Tribunal makes the Commission a party to the reference 
under section 157B.
(3) Where an organization (whether claiming to be representative of 
persons requiring licences or not) or a person (whether requiring a 
licence or not) applies to the Tribunal to be made a party to a 
reference, and the Tribunal is satisfied that the organization or 
person has a substantial interest in the operation of the scheme to 
which the reference relates, the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, make 
that organization or person a party to the reference.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(4) The Tribunal shall consider a scheme referred under this section 
and, after giving to the parties to the reference an opportunity of 
presenting their cases, shall make such order, confirming or 
varying the scheme or substituting for the scheme another scheme 
proposed by one of the parties, as the Tribunal considers 
reasonable in the circumstances.
(5) An order (other than an interim order) of the Tribunal under this 
section may, notwithstanding anything contained in the licence 
scheme to which it relates, be made so as to be in force either 
indefinitely or for such period as the Tribunal thinks fit.
(6) Where a licence scheme has been referred to the Tribunal under 
this section, the licensor may do either or both of the following 
things:
(a) bring the scheme into operation before the Tribunal makes an 
order in pursuance of the reference;
(b) withdraw the reference at any time before the Tribunal makes 
an order in pursuance of the reference, whether the scheme 
has been brought into operation or not.
(7) The scheme reflecting the Tribunal’s order:
(a) comes into operation when the order is made, if the scheme 
referred to the Tribunal had not already come into operation; 
and
(b) operates as long as the order remains in force.
This subsection has effect despite anything in the scheme referred 
to the Tribunal.
Note: Depending on the Tribunal’s order, the scheme reflecting the order 
will be the scheme confirmed by the order, the scheme as varied by 
the order or the scheme substituted by the order for the scheme 
referred to the Tribunal.
155  Reference of existing licence schemes to Tribunal
(1) Where, at any time while a licence scheme is in operation, a 
dispute arises with respect to the terms of the scheme between the 
licensor operating the scheme and:
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(a) an organization claiming to be representative of persons 
requiring licences in cases included in a class of cases to 
which the scheme applies; or
(b) any person claiming that he or she requires a licence in a case 
included in a class of cases to which the scheme applies;
the licensor, organization or person concerned may refer the 
scheme to the Tribunal in so far as the scheme relates to cases 
included in that class.
(2) The parties to a reference under this section are:
(a) the licensor, organization or person referring the scheme; and
(b) if the reference is not made by the licensor operating the 
scheme—that licensor; and
(c) such other organizations or persons (if any) as apply to the 
Tribunal to be made parties to the reference and, in 
accordance with the next succeeding subsection, are made 
parties to the reference; and
(d) the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, if 
the Tribunal makes the Commission a party to the reference 
under section 157B.
(3) Where an organization (whether claiming to be representative of 
persons requiring licences or not) or a person (whether requiring a 
licence or not) applies to the Tribunal to be made a party to a 
reference, and the Tribunal is satisfied that the organization or 
person has a substantial interest in the matter in dispute, the 
Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, make that organization or person a 
party to the reference.
(4) The Tribunal shall not begin to consider a reference under this 
section by an organization unless the Tribunal is satisfied that the 
organization is reasonably representative of the class of persons 
that it claims to represent.
(5) The Tribunal must consider the matter in dispute, give the parties 
an opportunity of presenting their cases then make an order that the 
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances doing one of 
the following to the scheme so far as it relates to the relevant class:
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(a) confirming it;
(b) varying it;
(c) substituting for it another scheme proposed by one of the 
parties.
This subsection has effect to subsection (4).
(6) An order (other than an interim order) of the Tribunal under this 
section may, notwithstanding anything contained in the licence 
scheme to which it relates, be made so as to be in force either 
indefinitely or for such period as the Tribunal thinks fit.
(7) A reference of a licence scheme to the Tribunal under this section 
may be withdrawn at any time before an order is made in 
pursuance of the reference.
(8) Where a licence scheme has been referred to the Tribunal under 
this section, the scheme remains in operation, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the scheme, until the Tribunal makes an 
order in pursuance of the reference.
(9) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to a 
reference with respect to any period after the reference has been 
withdrawn or after the Tribunal has refused to begin to consider the 
reference in pursuance of subsection (4).
(10) The scheme reflecting the Tribunal’s order operates as long as the 
order remains in force, despite anything in the scheme referred to 
the Tribunal.
Note: Depending on the Tribunal’s order, the scheme reflecting the order 
will be the scheme confirmed by the order, the scheme as varied by 
the order or the scheme substituted by the order for the scheme 
referred to the Tribunal.
156  Further reference of licence schemes to Tribunal
(1) Where the Tribunal has made an order (other than an interim order) 
under either of the last two preceding sections with respect to a 
licence scheme, then, subject to the next succeeding subsection, at 
any time while the order remains in force:
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(a) the licensor operating the scheme;
(b) any organization claiming to be representative of persons 
requiring licences in cases included in the class of cases to 
which the order applies; or
(c) any person claiming that he or she requires a licence in a case 
included in that class;
may refer the scheme reflecting the order to the Tribunal in so far 
as it relates to cases included in that class.
(2) A scheme shall not, except with the leave of the Tribunal, be 
referred to the Tribunal under the last preceding subsection at a 
time earlier than:
(a) where the order concerned was made so as to be in force 
indefinitely or for a period exceeding 15 months—the 
expiration of the period of 12 months commencing on the 
date on which the order was made; or
(b) where the order concerned was made so as to be in force for a 
period not exceeding 15 months—the commencement of the 
period of 3 months ending on the date of expiration of the 
order.
(3) The parties to a reference under this section are:
(a) the licensor, organization or person referring the scheme; and
(b) if the reference is not made by the licensor operating the 
scheme—that licensor; and
(c) such other organizations or persons (if any) as apply to the 
Tribunal to be made parties to the reference and, in 
accordance with the provisions applicable in that behalf by 
virtue of subsection (5), are made parties to the reference; 
and
(d) the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, if 
the Tribunal makes the Commission a party to the reference 
under section 157B.
(4) The Tribunal must consider the matter in dispute, give the parties 
an opportunity of presenting their cases then make an order that the 
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances doing one of 
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
the following to the scheme so far as it is referred to the Tribunal 
under subsection (1):
(a) confirming it;
(b) varying it;
(c) substituting for it another scheme proposed by one of the 
parties.
This subsection has effect to subsection (5).
(5) Subsections 155(3), (4), and (6) to (10) inclusive apply for the 
purposes of this section.
(6) The preceding subsections of this section have effect in relation to 
orders made under this section in like manner as they have effect in 
relation to orders made under either of the last two preceding 
sections.
(7) Nothing in this section prevents a licence scheme in respect of 
which an order has been made under either of the last two 
preceding sections from being again referred to the Tribunal under 
that section:
(a) in so far as the scheme relates to cases included in a class of 
cases to which the order does not apply—at any time; and
(b) in so far as the scheme relates to cases included in the class 
of cases to which the order applied while it was in force—
after the expiration of the order.
157  Application to Tribunal in relation to licences
Refusal or failure to grant licence under licence scheme
(1) A person who claims, in a case to which a licence scheme applies, 
that the licensor operating the scheme has refused or failed to grant 
him or her a licence in accordance with the scheme, or to procure 
the grant to him or her of such a licence, may apply to the Tribunal 
under this section.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
Licence scheme sets unreasonable charges or conditions for case
(2) A person who claims, in a case to which a licence scheme applies, 
that he or she requires a licence but that the grant of a licence in 
accordance with the scheme would, in that case, be subject to the 
payment of charges, or to conditions, that are not reasonable in the 
circumstances of the case may apply to the Tribunal under this 
section.
No licence scheme and licensor refuses or fails to grant reasonable 
licence
(3) A person who claims that he or she requires a licence in a case to 
which a licence scheme does not apply (including a case where a 
licence scheme has not been formulated or is not in operation) and:
(a) that a licensor has refused or failed to grant the licence, or to 
procure the grant of the licence, and that in the circumstances 
it is unreasonable that the licence should not be granted; or
(b) that a licensor proposes that the licence should be granted 
subject to the payment of charges, or to conditions, that are 
unreasonable;
may apply to the Tribunal under this section.
(4) An organization that claims that it is representative of persons 
requiring licences in cases to which a licence scheme does not 
apply (including cases where a licence scheme has not been 
formulated or is not in operation) and:
(a) that a licensor has refused or failed to grant the licences, or to 
procure the grant of the licences, and that in the 
circumstances it is unreasonable that the licences should not 
be granted; or
(b) that a licensor proposes that the licences should be granted 
subject to the payment of charges, or to conditions, that are 
unreasonable;
may apply to the Tribunal under this section.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
Other parties to application
(5) Where an organization (whether claiming to be representative of 
persons requiring licences or not) or a person (whether requiring a 
licence or not) applies to the Tribunal to be made a party to an 
application under any of the preceding subsections of this section, 
and the Tribunal is satisfied that the organization or person has a 
substantial interest in the matter in dispute, the Tribunal may, if it 
thinks fit, make that organization or person a party to the 
application.
Note: Under section 157B, the Tribunal may also make the Australian 
Competition and Consumer Commission a party to the application.
Letting parties present their cases
(6) The Tribunal must give the applicant, the licensor concerned and 
each other party (if any) to the application an opportunity of 
presenting their cases.
Order dealing with application under subsection (1)
(6A) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under 
subsection (1) is well-founded, the Tribunal must either:
(a) make an order specifying, in respect of the matters specified 
in the order, the charges, if any, and the conditions, that the 
Tribunal considers to be applicable in accordance with the 
licence scheme in relation to the applicant; or
(b) order that the applicant be granted a licence in the terms 
proposed by the applicant, the licensor concerned or another 
party to the application.
Order dealing with application under subsection (2) or (3)
(6B) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under 
subsection (2) or (3) is well-founded, the Tribunal must either:
(a) make an order specifying, in respect of the matters specified 
in the order, the charges, if any, and the conditions, that the 
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in 
relation to the applicant; or
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(b) order that the applicant be granted a licence in the terms 
proposed by the applicant, the licensor concerned or another 
party to the application.
Order dealing with application under subsection (4)
(6C) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under 
subsection (4) is well-founded, the Tribunal must either:
(a) make an order specifying, in respect of the matters specified 
in the order, the charges, if any, and the conditions, that the 
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in 
relation to persons who:
(i) are specified in the order (whether by reference to a 
class or otherwise); and
(ii) were represented by the applicant or were parties to the 
application; or
(b) order that a licence be granted, in the terms proposed by the 
applicant, the licensor concerned or another party to the 
application, to each person who:
(i) is specified in the order (whether by reference to a class 
or otherwise); and
(ii) was represented by the applicant or was a party to the 
application.
Definition of refusal or failure to grant a licence
(7) A reference in this section to a failure to grant a licence, or to 
procure the grant of a licence, shall be read as a reference to a 
failure to grant the licence, or to procure the grant of the licence, as 
the case may be, within a reasonable time after a request to do so.
157A  Tribunal must have regard to ACCC guidelines on request
(1) In making a decision on a reference or application under this 
Subdivision, the Tribunal must, if requested by a party to the 
reference or application, have regard to relevant guidelines (if any) 
made by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(2) To avoid doubt, subsection (1) does not prevent the Tribunal from 
having regard to other relevant matters in making a decision on a 
reference or application under this Subdivision.
157B  Tribunal may make ACCC party to reference or application
The Tribunal may make the Australian Competition and Consumer 
Commission a party to a reference or application made under this 
Subdivision if:
(a) the Commission asks to be made a party to the reference or 
application; and
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that it is appropriate that the 
Commission be a party to the reference or application.
158  Effect of licence scheme being continued in operation pending 
order of the Tribunal
(1) Where a licence scheme is in operation by virtue of this Part 
pending the making of an order on a reference under this Part and a 
person, in a case to which the scheme applies, does anything that, 
apart from this subsection, would be an infringement of a copyright 
but would not be such an infringement if the person were the 
holder of a licence granted in accordance with the scheme in so far 
as the scheme relates to cases to which the reference relates, that 
person shall, if he or she has complied with the relevant 
requirements, be in the like position, in any proceedings for 
infringement of that copyright, as if he or she had at the material 
time been the holder of such a licence.
(2) For the purposes of the last preceding subsection, the relevant 
requirements are:
(a) that, at all material times, the person concerned has complied 
with the conditions that, in accordance with the licence 
scheme, would be applicable to a licence in respect of the 
case concerned; and
(b) where, in accordance with the scheme, any charges are 
payable in respect of such a licence—that, at the material 
time, the person concerned had paid those charges to the 
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
licensor operating the scheme, or, if at that time the amount 
payable could not be ascertained, he or she had given an 
undertaking in writing to the licensor to pay the charges 
when ascertained.
(3) A person who does anything in relation to which subsection (1) 
applies is liable to pay to the licensor operating the licence scheme 
concerned the amount of any charges that would be payable if he 
or she were the holder of a licence granted in accordance with the 
scheme in so far as the scheme relates to the doing of that thing and 
the licensor may recover that amount in a court of competent 
jurisdiction from the person as a debt due to the licensor.
159  Effect of order of Tribunal in relation to licences
Order under section 154. 155 or 156
(1) Where an order made on a reference under this Part with respect to 
a licence scheme is for the time being in force and a person, in a 
case to which the scheme reflecting the order applies, does 
anything that, apart from this subsection, would be an infringement 
of copyright but would not be such an infringement if he or she 
were the holder of a licence granted in accordance with that 
scheme, in so far as the scheme relates to cases to which the order 
applies, that person shall, if he or she has complied with the 
relevant requirements, be in the like position, in any proceedings 
for infringement of that copyright, as if he or she had at the 
material time been the holder of such a licence.
(2) For the purposes of the last preceding subsection, the relevant 
requirements are:
(a) that, at all material times, the person concerned has complied 
with the conditions that, in accordance with the scheme 
reflecting the order, would be applicable to a licence in 
respect of the case concerned; and
(b) where, in accordance with the scheme, any charges are 
payable in respect of such a licence—that, at the material 
time, the person concerned had paid those charges to the 
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
licensor operating the scheme, or, if at that time the amount 
payable could not be ascertained, he or she had given an 
undertaking in writing to the licensor to pay the charges 
when ascertained.
(3) A person who does anything in relation to which subsection (1) 
applies is liable to pay to the licensor operating the scheme 
concerned the amount of any charges that would be payable if he 
or she were the holder of a licence granted in accordance with the 
scheme reflecting the order, in so far as the scheme relates to the 
doing of that thing, and the licensor may recover that amount in a 
court of competent jurisdiction from the person as a debt due to the 
licensor.
Order under section 157 specifying conditions and charges
(4) Where the Tribunal has made an order on an application under 
subsection 157(1), (2) or (3) specifying charges, if any, and 
conditions, in relation to the applicant, in respect of the matters 
specified in the order, then if:
(a) the applicant has complied with the conditions specified in 
the order; and
(b) in a case where the order specifies any charges—he or she 
has paid those charges to the licensor or, if the amount 
payable could not be ascertained, has given to the licensor an 
undertaking in writing to pay the charges when ascertained;
the applicant shall be in the like position, in any proceedings for 
infringement of copyright relating to any of those matters, as if he 
or she had at all material times been the holder of a licence granted 
by the owner of the copyright concerned on the conditions, and 
subject to payment of the charges (if any), specified in the order.
(5) Where the Tribunal has made an order on an application under 
subsection 157(4) specifying charges (if any) and conditions, in 
relation to the persons, or to persons included in the classes of 
persons, specified in the order, in respect of matters specified in the 
order, then, if:
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(a) any such person has complied with the conditions specified 
in the order; and
(b) in the case where the order specifies any charges—the person 
has paid those charges to the licensor or, if the amount 
payable could not be ascertained, has given to the licensor an 
undertaking in writing to pay the charges when ascertained;
that person shall be in the like position, in any proceedings for 
infringement of copyright relating to any of those matters, as if he 
or she had at all material times been the holder of a licence granted 
by the owner of the copyright concerned on the conditions, and 
subject to payment of the charges (if any), specified in the order.
(6) Where a person in relation to whom an order referred to in 
subsection (4) or subsection (5) applies does, in relation to any of 
the matters specified in that order, anything that, apart from that 
subsection, would be an infringement of copyright but would not 
be such an infringement if he or she were the holder of a licence in 
respect of the doing of that thing granted by the owner of the 
copyright concerned on the conditions and subject to payment of 
the charges (if any) specified in the order, that person is liable to 
pay to the owner of the copyright the amount of any charges that 
would be payable if he or she were the holder of such a licence and 
the owner of the copyright may recover that amount in a court of 
competent jurisdiction from the person as a debt due to the owner 
of the copyright.
(7) To avoid doubt, subsections (4) and (5) do not apply to an order 
that a person be granted a licence.
Order under section 157 that person be granted licence
(8) A person whom the Tribunal has ordered under section 157 be 
granted a licence in the terms proposed by the applicant, the 
licensor concerned or another party to the application under that 
section:
(a) is taken, for the purpose of proceedings for infringement of 
copyright, to have been granted the licence in those terms; 
and
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
(b) is liable to pay the owner of the copyright concerned the 
amount of any charges that would be payable if the person 
had been granted the licence in those terms.
Note: Paragraph (a)—if those terms made the licence subject to conditions 
and the person did not comply with the conditions, the licence will not 
give the person a defence in the proceedings.
(9) The owner of the copyright may recover the amount described in 
paragraph (8)(b) from the person in a court of competent 
jurisdiction as a debt due to the owner.
Subdivision I—General provisions
160  Interim orders
Where an application or reference is made to the Tribunal under 
this Act, the Tribunal may make an interim order having effect 
until the final decision of the Tribunal on the application or 
reference.
161  Reference of questions of law to Federal Court of Australia
(1) The Tribunal may, of its own motion or at the request of a party, 
refer a question of law arising in proceedings before it for 
determination by the Federal Court of Australia.
(2) A question shall not be referred to the Federal Court of Australia 
by virtue of the last preceding subsection in pursuance of a request 
made after the date on which the Tribunal gave its decision in the 
proceedings unless the request is made before the expiration of 
such period as is prescribed.
(3) If the Tribunal, after giving its decision in any proceedings, refuses 
a request to refer a question to the Federal Court of Australia, the 
party by whom the request was made may, within such period as is 
prescribed, apply to the Federal Court of Australia for an order 
directing the Tribunal to refer the question to the Federal Court of 
Australia.
  
Applications and references to the Tribunal  Division 3
(4) Where a reference is made to the Federal Court of Australia under 
this section with respect to any proceedings before the Tribunal, 
and where an application is made under the last preceding 
subsection with respect to any such proceedings, every party to the 
proceedings before the Tribunal is entitled to appear and to be 
heard.
(5) Where, after the Tribunal has given its decision in any proceedings, 
the Tribunal refers to the Federal Court of Australia under this 
section a question of law that arose in the course of the 
proceedings, and the Federal Court of Australia decides that the 
question was erroneously determined by the Tribunal:
(a) the Tribunal shall reconsider the matter in dispute and, if it 
considers it necessary to do so for the purpose of giving 
effect to the decision of the Federal Court of Australia, shall 
give to the parties to the proceedings a further opportunity of 
presenting their cases; and
(b) if it appears to the Tribunal to be appropriate, and in 
conformity with the decision of the Federal Court of 
Australia, to do so, the Tribunal shall make such order 
revoking or modifying any order previously made by it in the 
proceedings, or, in the case of proceedings under section 157 
where the Tribunal refused to make an order, shall make such 
order under that section, as the Tribunal considers to be 
appropriate.
(6) A reference of a question by the Tribunal to the Federal Court of 
Australia under this section shall be by way of stating a case for the 
opinion of the Federal Court of Australia.
(7) Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Court of Australia to hear 
and determine a question of law referred to it under this section.
(8) For the purposes of this section, a question of law does not include 
a question whether there is sufficient evidence to justify a finding 
of fact by the Tribunal.
  
Division 3  Applications and references to the Tribunal
162  Agreements or awards not affected
Nothing in this Part affects the operation of any agreement or of 
any award made by an arbitrator, whether the agreement or award 
was made before, or is made after, the commencement of this Act.
  
Procedure and evidence  Division 4
Division 4—Procedure and evidence
163  Proceedings to be in public except in special circumstances
(1) Subject to this section, the hearing of proceedings before the 
Tribunal shall be in public.
(2) Where the Tribunal is satisfied that it is desirable to do so by 
reason of the confidential nature of any evidence or matter or for 
any other reason, the Tribunal may:
(a) direct that a hearing or part of a hearing shall take place in 
private and give directions as to the persons who may be 
present; or
(b) give directions prohibiting or restricting the publication of 
evidence given before the Tribunal (whether in public or in 
private) or of matters contained in documents produced to the 
Tribunal.
163A  Application may be made to Tribunal by the agent of the 
copyright owner
(1) An owner of copyright may make an application to the Tribunal 
under this Act by his or her agent.
(2) Two or more owners of copyright may jointly make a single 
application to the Tribunal by the same agent against the same 
person or body.
164  Procedure
In proceedings before the Tribunal:
(a) the procedure of the Tribunal is, subject to this Act and the 
regulations, within the discretion of the Tribunal;
(b) the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence; and
(c) the proceedings shall be conducted with as little formality, 
and with as much expedition, as the requirements of this Act 
  
Division 4  Procedure and evidence
and a proper consideration of the matters before the Tribunal 
permit.
165  Mistakes or errors in orders of the Tribunal
The Tribunal may correct, in any order of the Tribunal, a clerical 
mistake or an error arising from an accidental slip or omission.
166  Regulations as to procedure
(1) The regulations may make provision for or in relation to the 
procedure in connexion with the making of references and 
applications to the Tribunal and the regulation of proceedings 
before the Tribunal and may prescribe the fees payable in respect 
of those references and applications and the fees and expenses of 
witnesses in those proceedings.
(2) The regulations may include provision:
(a) for requiring notice of an intended reference to the Tribunal 
under section 154, section 155 or section 156 to be advertised 
in accordance with the regulations;
(b) for requiring notice of an intended application to the Federal 
Court of Australia under subsection 161(3) to be given to the 
Tribunal and to the other parties to the proceedings, and for 
limiting the time within which any such notice is to be given;
(c) for suspending, or authorizing or requiring the Tribunal to 
suspend, the operation of orders of the Tribunal in cases 
where, after giving its decision, the Tribunal refers a question 
of law to the Federal Court of Australia;
(d) for modifying, in relation to orders of the Tribunal the 
operation of which is suspended, the operation of any 
provisions of this Part as to the effect of orders made under 
this Part;
(e) for the publication of notices, or the doing of any other 
things, to ensure that persons affected by the suspension of 
an order of the Tribunal will be informed of its suspension; 
and
  
Procedure and evidence  Division 4
(f) for regulating or prescribing any other matters incidental to 
or consequential upon any request, application, order or 
decision under section 161.
167  Power to take evidence on oath
(1) The Tribunal may take evidence on oath or affirmation, and for 
that purpose a member may administer an oath or affirmation.
(2) A member or the Registrar may summon a person to appear before 
the Tribunal to give evidence.
(3) A member or the Registrar may summon a person to produce 
specified documents or articles to the Tribunal by producing the 
documents or articles to a specified person at a specified time at a 
specified place.
168  Evidence in form of written statement
The Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, permit a person appearing as a 
witness before the Tribunal to give evidence by tendering, and 
verifying by oath or affirmation, a written statement, which shall 
be filed with the Registrar.
169  Representation
In proceedings before the Tribunal:
(a) a party other than a body corporate or an unincorporated 
body of persons may appear in person or be represented by 
an employee of the party approved by the Tribunal;
(b) a party being a body corporate may be represented by a 
director or other officer, or by an employee, of the party 
approved by the Tribunal;
(c) a party being an unincorporated body of persons or a member 
of such a body may be represented by a member, or by an 
officer or employee, of the body approved by the Tribunal; 
and
  
Division 4  Procedure and evidence
(d) any party may be represented by a barrister or solicitor of the 
High Court or of the Supreme Court of a State or of a 
Territory.
  
Alternative dispute resolution processes  Division 4A
Division 4A—Alternative dispute resolution processes
169A  Referral of proceeding for alternative dispute resolution 
process
(1) If an application or reference is made to the Tribunal, the President 
or a Deputy President may:
(a) direct the holding of a conference of the parties or their 
representatives in relation to the proceeding, or any part of 
the proceeding or any matter arising out of the proceeding; or
(b) direct that the proceeding, or any part of the proceeding or 
any matter arising out of the proceeding, be referred for a 
particular alternative dispute resolution process (other than 
conferencing).
(2) The President may also direct the holding of conferences of the 
parties or their representatives in the case of applications or 
references made to the Tribunal that are of a kind specified in the 
direction.
(3) The President may also direct that proceedings be referred for a 
particular alternative dispute resolution process (other than 
conferencing) in the case of applications or references made to the 
Tribunal that are of a kind specified in the direction.
(4) A direction may be given under a particular paragraph of 
subsection (1):
(a) whether or not a direction has previously been given under 
the same or the other paragraph of that subsection in relation 
to the proceeding; and
(b) whether or not a direction under subsection (2) or (3) has 
applied.
(5) If a direction under this section is applicable to:
(a) a proceeding; or
(b) a part of a proceeding; or
(c) a matter arising out of a proceeding;
  
Division 4A  Alternative dispute resolution processes
each party must act in good faith in relation to the conduct of the 
alternative dispute resolution process concerned.
169B  Directions by President or Deputy President
(1) The President or a Deputy President may give directions about 
alternative dispute resolution processes.
(2) Directions under subsection (1) may relate to:
(a) the procedure to be followed in the conduct of an alternative 
dispute resolution process; and
(b) the person who is to conduct an alternative dispute resolution 
process; and
(c) the procedure to be followed when an alternative dispute 
resolution process ends.
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit subsection (1).
(4) The President or a Deputy President may at any time vary or 
revoke a direction under subsection (1).
(5) A person is not entitled to conduct an alternative dispute resolution 
process unless the person is:
(a) a member; or
(b) the Registrar; or
(c) a person whose services are made available, under an 
arrangement made by the Registrar and the Chief Executive 
Officer and Principal Registrar of the Federal Court of 
Australia, to conduct the process; or
(d) a person engaged under section 169G.
169C  Agreement about the terms of a decision etc.
(1) If:
(a) in the course of an alternative dispute resolution process 
under this Division, agreement is reached between the parties 
or their representatives as to the terms of a decision of the 
Tribunal:
  
Alternative dispute resolution processes  Division 4A
(i) in the proceeding; or
(ii) in relation to the part of the proceeding; or
(iii) in relation to the matter arising out of the proceeding;
that would be acceptable to the parties; and
(b) the terms of the agreement are reduced to writing, signed by 
or on behalf of the parties and lodged with the Tribunal; and
(c) 7 days pass after lodgment, and none of the parties has 
notified the Tribunal in writing that he or she wishes to 
withdraw from the agreement; and
(d) the Tribunal is satisfied that a decision in the terms of the 
agreement or consistent with those terms would be within the 
powers of the Tribunal;
the Tribunal may, if it appears to it to be appropriate to do so, act 
in accordance with whichever of subsection (2) or (3) is relevant in 
the particular case.
(2) If the agreement reached is an agreement as to the terms of a 
decision of the Tribunal in the proceeding, the Tribunal may, 
without giving the parties an opportunity of presenting their cases, 
make a decision in accordance with those terms.
(3) If the agreement relates to:
(a) a part of the proceeding; or
(b) a matter arising out of the proceeding;
the Tribunal may, in its decision in the proceeding, give effect to 
the terms of the agreement without giving the parties an 
opportunity of presenting their cases so far as they relate only to 
the part or matter to which the agreement relates.
169D  Evidence not admissible
(1) Evidence of anything said, or any act done, at an alternative 
dispute resolution process under this Division is not admissible:
(a) in any court; or
(b) in any proceedings before a person authorised by a law of the 
Commonwealth or of a State or Territory to hear evidence; or
  
Division 4A  Alternative dispute resolution processes
(c) in any proceedings before a person authorised by the consent 
of the parties to hear evidence.
Exceptions
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply so as to prevent the admission, at the 
hearing of a proceeding before the Tribunal, of particular evidence 
if the parties agree to the evidence being admissible at the hearing.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply so as to prevent the admission, at the 
hearing of a proceeding before the Tribunal, of:
(a) a case appraisal report prepared by a person conducting an 
alternative dispute resolution process under this Division; or
(b) a neutral evaluation report prepared by a person conducting 
an alternative dispute resolution process under this Division;
unless a party to the proceeding notifies the Tribunal before the 
hearing that he or she objects to the report being admissible at the 
hearing.
169E  Eligibility of person conducting alternative dispute resolution 
process to sit as a member of the Tribunal
If:
(a) an alternative dispute resolution process under this Division 
in relation to a proceeding is conducted by a member of the 
Tribunal; and
(b) a party (the objector) to the proceeding notifies the Tribunal, 
before any party to the proceeding is given an opportunity of 
presenting its case, that the objector objects to that member 
participating in the proceeding;
that member is not entitled to be a member of the Tribunal as 
constituted for the purposes of the proceeding.
169F  Participation by telephone etc.
The person conducting an alternative dispute resolution process 
under this Division may allow a person to participate by:
(a) telephone; or
  
Alternative dispute resolution processes  Division 4A
(b) closed-circuit television; or
(c) any other means of communication.
169G  Engagement of persons to conduct alternative dispute 
resolution processes
(1) The Registrar may, on behalf of the Commonwealth, engage 
persons as consultants to conduct one or more kinds of alternative 
dispute resolution processes under this Division.
(2) The Registrar must not engage a person under subsection (1) unless 
the Registrar is satisfied, having regard to the person’s 
qualifications and experience, that the person is a suitable person to 
conduct the relevant kind or kinds of alternative dispute resolution 
processes under this Division.
  
Division 5  Miscellaneous
Division 5—Miscellaneous
170  Registrar
(1) There is to be a Registrar of the Tribunal.
(2) The Registrar is to be a person engaged under the Public Service 
Act 1999, or a person whose services are made available under an 
arrangement made under that Act, who is appointed as the 
Registrar by the Minister by written instrument.
Remuneration as public servant
(3) The office of Registrar is not a public office for the purposes of the 
Remuneration Tribunal Act 1973.
Resignation
(4) The Registrar may resign his or her appointment by giving the 
Minister a written resignation.
Termination of appointment
(5) The Minister may terminate, by writing signed by him or her, the 
appointment of the Registrar.
(6) The appointment of the Registrar is terminated if the Registrar 
ceases to be engaged under the Public Service Act 1999 or to be a 
person whose services are made available under an arrangement 
made under that Act.
Acting appointment
(7) The President may appoint a person engaged under the Public 
Service Act 1999, or a person whose services are made available 
under an arrangement made under that Act, to act as the Registrar:
(a) during a vacancy in the office of Registrar (whether or not an 
appointment has previously been made to the office); or
  
Miscellaneous  Division 5
(b) during any period, or during all periods, when the Registrar is 
absent from duty or from Australia or is, for any reason, 
unable to perform the duties of the office.
Note: For rules that apply to acting appointments, see section 33A of the 
Acts Interpretation Act 1901.
170A  Other staff of the Tribunal
Any staff needed to assist the Tribunal must be persons engaged 
under the Public Service Act 1999 or persons whose services are 
made available under arrangements made under that Act.
171  Protecting persons connected with Tribunal proceedings
(1) A member has, in the performance of his or her duty as a member, 
the same protection and immunity as a Justice of the High Court.
(1A) An alternative dispute resolution practitioner has, in the 
performance of his or her duties as an alternative dispute resolution 
practitioner under this Act, the same protection and immunity as a 
Justice of the High Court.
(1B) The Registrar has in the performance of his or her duty as Registrar 
under section 167, 174 or 175, the same protection and immunity 
as a Justice of the High Court.
(2) A barrister, solicitor or other person appearing before the Tribunal 
on behalf of a party has the same protection and immunity as a 
barrister has in appearing for a party in proceedings in the High 
Court.
(3) A person summoned to appear before the Tribunal as a witness has 
the same protection, and is, in addition to the penalties provided by 
this Act, subject to the same liabilities, in any civil or criminal 
proceedings as a witness in proceedings in the High Court.
(4) In this section:
  
Division 5  Miscellaneous
alternative dispute resolution practitioner means a person who 
conducts an alternative dispute resolution process under 
Division 4A.
172  Offences by witnesses
Failing to appear
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person has been summoned to appear as a witness before 
the Tribunal; and
(b) there has been tendered to the person an amount of money at 
least equal to the expenses the person could reasonably be 
expected to incur in connection with appearing as a witness; 
and
(c) the person fails to appear in obedience to the summons.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Failing to produce document or article summoned
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person has been summoned to produce a document or 
article to the Tribunal; and
(b) there has been tendered to the person an amount of money at 
least equal to the expenses the person could reasonably be 
expected to incur in connection with producing the document 
or article; and
(c) the person fails to produce the document or article.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Refusal to swear or affirm
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person appears before the Tribunal; and
(b) the person refuses to be sworn or to make an affirmation.
  
Miscellaneous  Division 5
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Refusal to answer questions or produce documents as required
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person appears before the Tribunal; and
(b) the Tribunal requires the person to answer a question or 
produce a document or article; and
(c) the person refuses to answer the question or produce the 
document or article.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
General defence of reasonable excuse
(5) Subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4) does not apply if the person has a 
reasonable excuse.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (5) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
173  Offences relating to the Tribunal
Insulting a member
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the person’s conduct insults or disturbs a member in the 
exercise of his or her powers or functions as a member.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Interrupting proceedings of the Tribunal
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the person’s conduct interrupts the proceedings of the 
Tribunal.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
  
Division 5  Miscellaneous
Using insulting language
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person uses insulting language towards another person; 
and
(b) the other person is a member.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Creating a disturbance
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the person’s conduct creates a disturbance in or near a place 
where the Tribunal is sitting.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Taking part in creating or continuing a disturbance
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person takes part in creating or continuing a disturbance; 
and
(b) the disturbance is in or near a place where the Tribunal is 
sitting.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Contravention of direction limiting publication of evidence
(6) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the conduct contravenes a direction of the Tribunal under 
paragraph 163(2)(b).
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Contempt of Tribunal
(7) A person commits an offence if:
  
Miscellaneous  Division 5
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(b) the person’s conduct would, if the Tribunal were a court of 
record, constitute a contempt of that court.
Penalty: 30 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
Definition of engage in conduct
(8) In this section:
engage in conduct means:
(a) do an act; or
(b) omit to perform an act.
174  Costs of proceedings
(1) The Tribunal may order that the costs of any proceedings before it 
incurred by any party, or a part of those costs, shall be paid by any 
other party and may tax or settle the amount of the costs to be so 
paid, or specify the manner in which they are to be taxed.
(1A) In taxing or settling under subsection (1) the amount of the costs, 
or of a part of the costs, of any proceedings before the Tribunal 
incurred by a party, the Tribunal or the person or persons taxing or 
settling those costs, as the case may be, shall allow so much only 
of the amount as in the opinion of the Tribunal or the person or 
persons, as the case may be, would be allowed if the proceedings 
were proceedings before the Federal Court of Australia and the 
costs were taxed under the Federal Court Rules.
(2) Costs directed by the Tribunal to be paid to a party may be 
recovered by that party in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(2A) In any proceedings before a court under subsection (2) for the 
recovery of costs directed by the Tribunal to be paid to a party, a 
certificate signed by the Registrar that states that the costs have 
been taxed or the amount of the costs has been settled and sets out 
the amount of the costs as so taxed or settled is prima facie 
evidence of the matters stated in the certificate.
  
Division 5  Miscellaneous
175  Proof of orders of Tribunal
Without prejudice to any other method available by law for the 
proof of orders of the Tribunal, a document purporting to be a copy 
of such an order, and to be certified by the Registrar to be a true 
copy of the order, is, in any proceeding, evidence of the order.
  
Crown copyright  Division 1
Part VII—The Crown
Division 1—Crown copyright
176  Crown copyright in original works made under direction of 
Crown
(1) Where, apart from this section, copyright would not subsist in an 
original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work made by, or 
under the direction or control of, the Commonwealth or a State, 
copyright subsists in the work by virtue of this subsection.
(2) The Commonwealth or a State is, subject to this Part and to Part X, 
the owner of the copyright in an original literary, dramatic, musical 
or artistic work made by, or under the direction or control of, the 
Commonwealth or the State, as the case may be.
177  Crown copyright in original works first published in Australia 
under direction of Crown
Subject to this Part and to Part X, the Commonwealth or a State is 
the owner of the copyright in an original literary, dramatic, musical 
or artistic work first published in Australia if first published by, or 
under the direction or control of, the Commonwealth or the State, 
as the case may be.
178  Crown copyright in recordings and films made under direction 
of Crown
(1) Where, apart from this section, copyright would not subsist in a 
sound recording or cinematograph film made by, or under the 
direction or control of, the Commonwealth or a State, copyright 
subsists in the recording or film by virtue of this subsection.
(2) The Commonwealth or a State is, subject to this Part and to Part X, 
the owner of the copyright in a sound recording or cinematograph 
  
Division 1  Crown copyright
film made by, or under the direction or control of, the 
Commonwealth or the State, as the case may be.
179  Provisions relating to ownership of copyright may be modified 
by agreement
The last three preceding sections have effect subject to any 
agreement made by, or on behalf of, the Commonwealth or a State 
with the author of the work or with the maker of the sound 
recording or cinematograph film, as the case may be, by which it is 
agreed that the copyright in the work, recording or film is to vest in 
the author or maker, or in another person specified in the 
agreement.
180  Duration of Crown copyright in original works, sound 
recordings and films
Copyright in copyright material subsists until 50 years after the 
calendar year in which the material is made if:
(a) the material is a work, sound recording or cinematograph 
film; and
(b) the Commonwealth or a State:
(a) is the owner; or
(b) would, but for an agreement to which section 179 
applies, be the owner;
of copyright in the material.
182  Application of Parts III and IV to copyright subsisting by virtue 
of this Part
(1) Part III (other than the provisions of that Part relating to the 
subsistence, duration or ownership of copyright) applies in relation 
to copyright subsisting by virtue of this Part in a literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work in like manner as it applies in relation to 
copyright subsisting in such a work by virtue of that Part.
(2) Part IV (other than the provisions of that Part relating to the 
subsistence, duration or ownership of copyright) applies in relation 
  
Crown copyright  Division 1
to copyright subsisting by virtue of this Part in a sound recording 
or cinematograph film in like manner as it applies in relation to 
copyright subsisting in such a recording or film by virtue of that 
Part.
182A  Copyright in statutory instruments and judgments etc.
(1) The copyright, including any prerogative right or privilege of the 
Crown in the nature of copyright, in a prescribed work is not 
infringed by the making, by reprographic reproduction, of one 
copy of the whole or of a part of that work by or on behalf of a 
person and for a particular purpose.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the making, by reprographic 
reproduction, of a copy of the whole or a part of the work, where a 
charge is made for making and supplying that copy, unless the 
amount of the charge does not exceed the cost of making and 
supplying that copy.
(3) In subsection (1), a prescribed work means:
(a) an Act or State Act, an enactment of the legislature of a 
Territory or an instrument (including an Ordinance or a rule, 
regulation or by-law) made under an Act, a State Act or such 
an enactment;
(b) a judgment, order or award of a Federal court or of a court of 
a State or Territory;
(c) a judgment, order or award of a Tribunal (not being a court) 
established by or under an Act or other enactment of the 
Commonwealth, a State or a Territory;
(d) reasons for a decision of a court referred to in paragraph (b), 
or of a Tribunal referred to in paragraph (c), given by the 
court or by the Tribunal; or
(e) reasons given by a Justice, Judge or other member of a court 
referred to in paragraph (b), or of a member of a Tribunal 
referred to in paragraph (c), for a decision given by him or 
her either as the sole member, or as one of the members, of 
the court or Tribunal.
  
Division 2  Use of copyright material for the Crown
Division 2—Use of copyright material for the Crown
182B  Definitions
(1) Subject to subsection (2), in this Division:
collecting society means a company in respect of which a 
declaration is in force under section 153F.
copyright material means:
(a) a work; or
(b) a published edition of a work; or
(c) a sound recording; or
(d) a cinematograph film; or
(e) a television or sound broadcast; or
(f) a work that is included in a sound recording, a cinematograph 
film or a television or sound broadcast.
government means the Commonwealth or a State.
Note: State includes the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern 
Territory: see paragraph 10(3)(n).
government copy means a reproduction in a material form of 
copyright material made under subsection 183(1).
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to a work does not include a 
reference to a literary work that consists of a computer program or 
a compilation of computer programs.
182C  Relevant collecting society
A company is the relevant collecting society in relation to a 
government copy if there is in force, under Division 3 of Part VI, a 
declaration of the company as the collecting society for the 
purposes of this Division in relation to:
(a) all government copies; or
  
Use of copyright material for the Crown  Division 2
(b) a class of government copies that includes the 
first-mentioned government copy.
183  Use of copyright material for the services of the Crown 
(1) The copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or a 
published edition of such a work, or in a sound recording, 
cinematograph film, television broadcast or sound broadcast, is not 
infringed by the Commonwealth or a State, or by a person 
authorized in writing by the Commonwealth or a State, doing any 
acts comprised in the copyright if the acts are done for the services 
of the Commonwealth or State.
(2) Where the Government of the Commonwealth has made an 
agreement or arrangement with the Government of some other 
country for the supply to that country of goods required for the 
defence of that country:
(a) the doing of any act in connexion with the supply of those 
goods in pursuance of the agreement or arrangement; and
(b) the sale to any person of such of those goods as are not 
required for the purposes of the agreement or arrangement;
shall, for the purposes of the last preceding subsection, be each 
deemed to be for the services of the Commonwealth.
(3) Authority may be given under subsection (1) before or after the 
acts in respect of which the authority is given have been done, and 
may be given to a person notwithstanding that he or she has a 
licence granted by, or binding on, the owner of the copyright to do 
the acts.
(4) Where an act comprised in a copyright has been done under 
subsection (1), the Commonwealth or State shall, as soon as 
possible, unless it appears to the Commonwealth or State that it 
would be contrary to the public interest to do so, inform the owner 
of the copyright, as prescribed, of the doing of the act and shall 
furnish him or her with such information as to the doing of the act 
as he or she from time to time reasonably requires.
  
Division 2  Use of copyright material for the Crown
(5) Where an act comprised in a copyright has been done under 
subsection (1), the terms for the doing of the act are such terms as 
are, whether before or after the act is done, agreed between the 
Commonwealth or the State and the owner of the copyright or, in 
default of agreement, as are fixed by the Copyright Tribunal.
(6) An agreement or licence (whether made or granted before or after 
the commencement of this Act) fixing the terms upon which a 
person other than the Commonwealth or a State may do acts 
comprised in a copyright is inoperative with respect to the doing of 
those acts, after the commencement of this Act, under 
subsection (1), unless the agreement or licence has been approved 
by:
(a) in the case of the Commonwealth—the Minister; or
(b) in the case of a State—the Minister of the State with 
responsibility for copyright.
(7) Where an article is sold and the sale is not, by virtue of 
subsection (1), an infringement of a copyright, the purchaser of the 
article, and a person claiming through him or her, is entitled to deal 
with the article as if the Commonwealth or State were the owner of 
that copyright.
(8) An act done under subsection (1) does not constitute publication of 
a work or other subject-matter and shall not be taken into account 
in the application of any provision of this Act relating to the 
duration of any copyright.
(9) Where an exclusive licence is in force in relation to any copyright, 
the preceding subsections of this section have effect as if any 
reference in those subsections to the owner of the copyright were a 
reference to the exclusive licensee.
(11) The reproduction, copying or communication of the whole or a part 
of a work or other subject-matter for the educational purposes of an 
educational institution of, or under the control of, the 
Commonwealth, a State, the Australian Capital Territory or the 
Northern Territory shall, for the purposes of this section, be 
deemed not to be an act done for the services of the 
  
Use of copyright material for the Crown  Division 2
Commonwealth, that State, the Australian Capital Territory or the 
Northern Territory.
183A  Special arrangements for copying for services of government
(1) Subsections 183(4) and (5) do not apply in relation to a 
government copy (whenever it was made) if a company is the 
relevant collecting society for the purposes of this Division in 
relation to the copy and the company has not ceased operating as 
that collecting society.
(2) If subsection 183(5) does not apply to government copies made in 
a particular period for the services of a government, the 
government must pay the relevant collecting society in relation to 
those copies (other than excluded copies) equitable remuneration 
worked out for that period using a method:
(a) agreed on by the collecting society and the government; or
(b) if there is no agreement—determined by the Tribunal under 
section 153K.
(3) The method of working out equitable remuneration payable to a 
collecting society in respect of government copies (other than 
excluded copies) for a period must:
(a) take into account the estimated number of those copies made 
for the services of the government during the period, being 
copies in relation to which the society is the relevant 
collecting society; and
(b) specify the sampling system to be used for estimating the 
number of copies for the purposes of paragraph (a).
(4) The method of working out the equitable remuneration payable 
may provide for different treatment of different kinds or classes of 
government copies.
(5) Subsections (3) and (4) apply whether the method is agreed on by 
the collecting society and the government or is determined by the 
Tribunal.
(6) In this section:
  
Division 2  Use of copyright material for the Crown
excluded copies means government copies in respect of which it 
appears to the government concerned that it would be contrary to 
the public interest to disclose information about the making of the 
copies.
183B  Payment and recovery of equitable remuneration payable for 
government copies
(1) Equitable remuneration payable to a collecting society under 
subsection 183A(2) must be paid:
(a) in the manner, and at the times, agreed on by the collecting 
society and the government; or
(b) if the Tribunal has made an order under subsection 153K(3) 
specifying how and when payments are to be made—in the 
manner, and at the times, specified in the order.
(2) If equitable remuneration is not paid in accordance with the 
agreement or the Tribunal’s order, the collecting society may 
recover the remuneration as a debt due to the society in a court of 
competent jurisdiction.
183C  Powers of collecting society to carry out sampling
(1) This section applies if the method of working out equitable 
remuneration payable under subsection 183A(2) for government 
copies made for the services of a government has been agreed on 
by the government and the relevant collecting society or has been 
determined by the Tribunal.
(2) The collecting society may give written notice to the government 
that the society wishes to carry out sampling in accordance with 
the method during a specified period at specified premises 
occupied by the government. The period specified must not start 
earlier than 7 days after the day on which the notice is given.
(3) The government may give the collecting society a written 
objection, based on reasonable grounds, to the proposal to carry out 
sampling during the period, or at the premises, specified in the 
notice. However, if it does so, the notice of objection must propose 
  
Use of copyright material for the Crown  Division 2
an alternative period during which, or alternative premises at 
which, as the case may be, sampling may be carried out.
(4) If the government gives the collecting society an objection, 
sampling may not be carried out during the period, or at the 
premises, to which the objection relates unless the objection is 
withdrawn.
(5) If the government has not objected, or has withdrawn any objection 
it made, before or during the specified period, a person authorised 
in writing by the society may, during that period, enter the 
premises specified in the notice and carry out sampling in 
accordance with the method on any ordinary working day for 
government staff who work in the premises.
(6) The government must take reasonable steps to ensure that the 
person who attends at the premises is given all reasonable and 
necessary facilities and assistance for carrying out the sampling.
183D  Annual report and accounts of collecting society
(1) As soon as practicable after the end of each financial year, a 
company that was a collecting society during any part of the year 
must prepare a report of its operations as a collecting society 
during the year and send a copy of the report to the Minister.
(2) A collecting society must keep accounting records correctly 
recording and explaining the transactions of the society (including 
any transactions as trustee) and the financial position of the 
society.
(3) Accounting records must be kept in a manner that will enable true 
and fair accounts of the society to be prepared from time to time 
and to be conveniently and properly audited.
(4) As soon as practicable after the end of each financial year, a 
company that was a collecting society during any part of the year 
must:
(a) have its accounts audited by an auditor who is not a member 
of the society; and
  
Division 2  Use of copyright material for the Crown
(b) give a copy of the audited accounts and the auditor’s report 
on the audit to the Minister.
(5) The Minister must cause a copy of a document given to the 
Minister under subsection (1) or paragraph (4)(b) to be laid before 
each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting days of that House 
after the Minister received the document.
(6) A collecting society must give its members reasonable access to 
copies of:
(a) all reports and audited accounts prepared by it under this 
section; and
(b) all auditors’ reports on the audit of the accounts.
(7) This section does not affect any obligations of a collecting society 
relating to the preparation and lodging of annual returns or 
accounts under the law under which it is incorporated.
183E  Alteration of rules of collecting society
If a collecting society alters its rules, it must give a copy of the 
altered rules, together with a statement of the effects of, and 
reasons for, the alteration, to the Minister and the Tribunal within 
21 days after the day on which the alteration was made.
183F  Applying to Tribunal for review of distribution arrangement
(1) A collecting society or a member of a collecting society may apply 
to the Copyright Tribunal for review of the arrangement adopted, 
or proposed to be adopted, by the collecting society for distributing 
amounts it collects in a period.
(2) If the Tribunal makes an order under section 153KA varying the 
arrangement or substituting for it another arrangement, the 
arrangement reflecting the Tribunal’s order has effect as if it had 
been adopted in accordance with the collecting society’s rules, but 
does not affect a distribution started before the order was made.
  
Foreign countries  Division 1
Part VIII—Extension or restriction of operation of 
Act
Division 1—Foreign countries
184  Application of Act to countries other than Australia
(1) Subject to this section, the regulations may make provision 
applying any of the provisions of this Act (other than those of 
Part XIA) specified in the regulations, in relation to a country 
(other than Australia) so specified, in any one or more of the 
following ways:
(a) so that the provisions apply in relation to literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic works or editions first published, or sound 
recordings or cinematograph films made or first published, in 
that country in like manner as those provisions apply in 
relation to literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works or 
editions first published, or sound recordings or 
cinematograph films made or first published, in Australia;
(b) so that the provisions apply in relation to artistic works that 
are buildings situated in that country or are attached to, or 
form part of, buildings situated in that country in like manner 
as those provisions apply in relation to artistic works that are 
buildings situated in Australia or are attached to, or form part 
of, buildings situated in Australia;
(c) so that the provisions apply in relation to persons who, at a 
material time, are citizens or nationals of that country in like 
manner as those provisions apply in relation to persons who, 
at such a time, are Australian citizens;
(d) so that the provisions apply in relation to persons who, at a 
material time, are resident in that country in like manner as 
those provisions apply in relation to persons who, at such a 
time, are resident in Australia;
(e) so that the provisions apply in relation to bodies incorporated 
under the law of that country in like manner as those 
  
Division 1  Foreign countries
provisions apply in relation to bodies incorporated under a 
law of the Commonwealth or of a State;
(f) so that the provisions apply in relation to television 
broadcasts and sound broadcasts made from places in that 
country by persons entitled under the law of that country to 
make such broadcasts in like manner as those provisions 
apply in relation to television broadcasts and sound 
broadcasts made from places in Australia by the Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation, by the Special Broadcasting 
Service Corporation, by a holder of a licence allocated by the 
Australian Communications and Media Authority under the 
Broadcasting Services Act 1992 or by a person authorised to 
make the broadcast by a class licence determined by that 
Authority under that Act.
(2) Regulations applying a provision of this Act in relation to a 
country other than Australia in accordance with the last preceding 
subsection:
(a) may apply the provision without exception or modification or 
subject to such exceptions or modifications as are specified 
in the regulations; and
(b) may apply the provision either generally or in relation to such 
classes of works or other subject-matter, or other classes of 
cases, as are specified in the regulations.
(3) Before the Governor-General makes a regulation for the purposes 
of subsection (1) applying a provision of this Act in relation to a 
country other than Australia:
(a) the country must be a party to an international agreement 
specified, in relation to the provision of this Act, by the 
regulations for the purposes of this paragraph; or
(b) the Minister must be satisfied that adequate protection is or 
will be given under the law of the country to owners of 
copyright under this Act in the class of works or other 
subject-matter to which the provision of this Act relates.
(4) Where:
  
Foreign countries  Division 1
(a) the identity of the author of an unpublished work is unknown 
but there are reasonable grounds for believing that the author 
of the work was, at the time when, or for a substantial part of 
the period during which, the work was made, a citizen or 
national of a country other than Australia;
(b) under the law of that country, a person is authorized to 
represent the author, or to protect and enforce the rights of 
the author, in relation to that work; and
(c) provision is made by the regulations applying any of the 
provisions of this Act in relation to works made by citizens 
or nationals of that country;
that person shall, for the purposes of those provisions as so 
applying, be treated as if he or she were the author of the work.
185  Denial of copyright to citizens of countries not giving adequate 
protection to Australian works
(2) The regulations may, subject to subsection (3), provide, either 
generally or in such classes of cases as are specified in the 
regulations, that copyright under this Act does not subsist in works 
first published after a date specified in the regulations (which may 
be a date before the commencement of the regulations or before the 
commencement of this Act) if, at the time of the first publication of 
those works, the authors of the works were or are:
(a) citizens or nationals of a country specified in the regulations, 
not being at that time persons resident in Australia; or
(b) in the case of works being sound recordings or 
cinematograph films—bodies incorporated under the law of a 
country specified in the regulations.
(3) Before the Governor-General makes a regulation for the purposes 
of subsection (2) in relation to a country:
(a) the Minister must be satisfied that that the law of the country:
(i) does not give adequate protection to Australian works; 
or
(ii) does not give adequate protection in relation to a class 
or classes of such works;
  
Division 1  Foreign countries
(whether the lack of protection relates to the nature of the 
work or the nationality, citizenship or country of residence of 
its author, or all of those matters); and
(b) the Minister must have regard to the nature and extent of that 
lack of protection.
(4) In this section:
Australian work means a work the author of which was, at the 
time when the work was made, a qualified person for the purposes 
of the relevant provision of this Act.
author, in relation to a sound recording or a cinematograph film, 
means the maker of the recording or film.
the relevant provision of this Act means:
(a) in relation to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work—section 32; and
(b) in relation to a sound recording or a cinematograph 
film—Part IV.
work means a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a sound 
recording or a cinematograph film.
  
International organizations  Division 2
Division 2—International organizations
186  Application of Act to international organizations
(1) The regulations may, subject to subsection (1A), declare an 
organization:
(a) of which 2 or more countries, or the Governments of 2 or 
more countries, are members; or
(b) that is constituted by persons representing 2 or more 
countries, or representing the Governments of 2 or more 
countries;
to be an international organization to which this Act applies.
(1A) Before the Governor-General makes a regulation for the purposes 
of subsection (1) in relation to an organization, the Minister must 
be satisfied that it is desirable that this Act should apply in relation 
to the organization.
(2) An international organization to which this Act applies that 
otherwise does not have, or at some material time otherwise did not 
have, the legal capacities of a body corporate has, and shall be 
deemed at all material times to have had, the legal capacities of a 
body corporate for the purpose of holding, dealing with and 
enforcing copyright and for the purposes of all legal proceedings 
relating to copyright.
187  Original works made or first published by international 
organizations
(1) Where an original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is 
made by, or under the direction or control of, an international 
organization to which this Act applies in such circumstances that 
copyright would not, apart from this subsection, subsist in the 
work:
(a) copyright subsists in the work; and
(c) the organization is, subject to Part X, the owner of that 
copyright.
  
Division 2  International organizations
(2) Where an original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is 
first published by, or under the direction or control of, an 
international organization to which this Act applies in such 
circumstances that copyright would not, apart from this subsection, 
subsist in the work immediately after the first publication of the 
work:
(a) copyright subsists in the work, or, if copyright in the work 
subsisted immediately before its first publication, continues 
to subsist in the work; and
(c) the organization is, subject to Part X, the owner of that 
copyright.
(3) Part III, other than the provisions of that Part relating to the 
subsistence, duration or ownership of copyright, applies in relation 
to copyright subsisting by virtue of this section in like manner as it 
applies in relation to copyright subsisting by virtue of that Part.
(4) This section has effect subject to section 188A.
188  Subject-matter, other than original works, made or first 
published by international organizations
(1) Where a sound recording or a cinematograph film is made by, or 
under the direction or control of, an international organization to 
which this Act applies in such circumstances that copyright would 
not, apart from this subsection, subsist in the recording or film:
(a) copyright subsists in the recording or film; and
(c) the organization is, subject to Part X, the owner of that 
copyright.
(2) Where a sound recording or a cinematograph film is first published 
by, or under the direction or control of, an international 
organization to which this Act applies in such circumstances that 
copyright would not, apart from this subsection, subsist in the 
recording or film immediately after the first publication of the 
recording or film:
  
International organizations  Division 2
(a) copyright subsists in the recording or film, or, if copyright in 
the recording or film subsisted immediately before its first 
publication, continues to subsist in the recording or film; and
(c) the organization is, subject to Part X, the owner of that 
copyright.
(3) Where an edition of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or 
of 2 or more literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works, other than 
an edition that reproduces a previous edition of the same work or 
works, is published by, or under the direction or control of, an 
international organization to which this Act applies in such 
circumstances that copyright would not, apart from this subsection, 
subsist in the edition immediately after the first publication of the 
edition:
(a) copyright subsists in the edition; and
(c) the organization is, subject to Part X, the owner of that 
copyright.
(4) Part IV, other than the provisions of that Part relating to the 
subsistence, duration or ownership of copyright, applies in relation 
to copyright subsisting by virtue of this section in like manner as it 
applies in relation to copyright subsisting by virtue of that Part.
(5) This section has effect subject to section 188A.
188A  Duration of international organization copyright
(1) This section applies to copyright that subsists in copyright material 
under section 187 or 188.
Copyright material first made public before 1 January 2019
(2) The copyright continues to subsist, subject to subsection (4), until 
70 years after the calendar year in which the copyright material 
was first made public if the material was first made public before 
1 January 2019.
  
Division 2  International organizations
Copyright material never made public, and material first made 
public on or after 1 January 2019
(3) The following table has effect, subject to subsection (4), if the 
copyright material was not first made public before 1 January 
2019.
Duration of copyright—copyright material not first made public before 
1 January 2019
Item Column 1
If …
Column 2
the copyright continues 
to subsist until …
1 the copyright material is first made public 
before the end of 50 years after the calendar 
year in which the material was made
70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the material was first 
made public.
2 item 1 does not apply 70 years after the 
calendar year in which 
the copyright material 
was made.
Editions
(4) If the copyright material is an edition to which subsection 188(3) 
applies, the copyright continues to subsist until 25 years after the 
calendar year in which the edition was first made public.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Preliminary  Division 1
Part IX—Moral rights of performers and of 
authors of literary, dramatic, musical or 
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 1—Preliminary
189  Definitions
In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears:
act of false attribution:
(a) in relation to an author’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by subsection 195AC(2); and
(b) in relation to a performer’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by subsection 195AHA(2).
artistic work means an artistic work in which copyright subsists.
attributable act:
(a) in relation to an author’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by subsection 193(2); and
(b) in relation to a performer’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by subsection 195ABA(2).
attributor:
(a) in relation to an author’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by subsection 195AC(2); and
(b) in relation to a performer’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by subsection 195AHA(2).
author, in relation to a cinematograph film, means the maker of the 
film. 
cinematograph film means the complete and final version of a 
cinematograph film in which copyright subsists.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 1  Preliminary
copy record means a record so far as it embodies:
(a) a recorded performance; or
(b) a substantial part of a recorded performance;
being a record derived directly or indirectly from an original record 
of the performance.
deal means sell, let for hire, by way of trade offer or expose for 
sale or hire, exhibit in public, or distribute and, in Divisions 3 and 
3A, includes publish.
derogatory treatment:
(a) in relation to an author’s moral rights—has the relevant 
meaning given by Division 4; and
(b) in relation to a performer’s moral rights—has the meaning 
given by section 195ALB.
director, in relation to a cinematograph film, has a meaning 
affected by section 191.
dramatic work means a dramatic work in which copyright subsists.
infringing article means:
(a) in relation to an author’s moral rights:
(i) an article that embodies a literary, dramatic, musical or 
artistic work, or a cinematograph film, whether or not 
the article bears or contains other material; or
(ii) a reproduction of, or of an adaptation of, a literary, 
dramatic or musical work; or
(iii) a reproduction of an artistic work; or
(iv) a copy of a cinematograph film;
being a work or film in respect of which a moral right of the 
author has been infringed, other than by derogatory treatment 
not involving the material distortion or alteration of, or the 
mutilation of, the work or film; and
(b) in relation to the moral rights of a performer in a live 
performance:
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Preliminary  Division 1
(i) a copy record of the live performance, where the 
making of the copy record has infringed the performer’s 
right of attribution of performership; or
(ii) a record embodying the live performance, where a 
person’s name is inserted or affixed on the record and 
the inserting or affixing has infringed the performer’s 
right not to have performership falsely attributed; or
(iii) a record embodying the live performance, where the 
record also embodies sounds the making of which have 
infringed the performer’s right not to have 
performership falsely attributed; or
(iv) a record embodying the live performance, being the live 
performance as affected by derogatory treatment that 
has infringed the performer’s right of integrity of 
performership; and
(c) in relation to the moral rights of a performer in a recorded 
performance:
(i) a copy record of the recorded performance, where the 
making of the copy record has infringed the performer’s 
right of attribution of performership; or
(ii) a record embodying the recorded performance, where a 
person’s name is inserted or affixed on the record and 
the inserting or affixing has infringed the performer’s 
right not to have performership falsely attributed; or
(iii) a copy record of the recorded performance, where 
dealings with the copy as a copy of an unaltered 
recorded performance have infringed the performer’s 
right not to have performership falsely attributed; or
(iv) a record embodying the recorded performance, being a 
record that incorporates derogatory treatment that has 
infringed the performer’s right of integrity of 
performership.
literary work means a literary work in which copyright subsists.
maker, in relation to a cinematograph film, means the director of 
the film, the producer of the film and the screenwriter of the film.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 1  Preliminary
moral right means:
(a) in relation to an author:
(i) a right of attribution of authorship; or
(ii) a right not to have authorship falsely attributed; or
(iii) a right of integrity of authorship; and
(b) in relation to a performer:
(i) a right of attribution of performership; or
(ii) a right not to have performership falsely attributed; or
(iii) a right of integrity of performership.
musical work means a musical work in which copyright subsists.
name, in Divisions 3 and 3A, includes a pseudonym, initials or a 
monogram.
original record means a record produced upon the making of a 
sound recording of a live performance.
Note: The sound track of a cinematograph film is treated as not being a 
sound recording: see section 23.
performance means a performance within the meaning of 
Part XIA, so far as the performance consists of sounds.
performer in a performance:
(a) means each person who contributed to the sounds of the 
performance; and
(b) in relation to a performance that occurs outside Australia, 
does not include a person who is not a qualified person at the 
time of the performance.
Note: See also section 191B, which deals with the conductor of a musical 
performance.
performership means participation in a performance, as the 
performer or one of the performers.
person representing the author, in relation to a possible 
infringement of any of an author’s moral rights in respect of a 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Preliminary  Division 1
work, means a person who, under subsection 195AN(1) or (2), is 
entitled to exercise and enforce the moral right concerned.
person representing the performer means a person who, under 
subsection 195ANB(1) or (2), is entitled to exercise and enforce a 
performer’s moral right.
producer, in relation to a cinematograph film, has the meaning 
given by section 191.
qualified person has the same meaning as in Part XIA.
recorded performance means a performance embodied in a record 
so as to constitute a sound recording.
record embodying a performance means:
(a) an original record of a performance; or
(b) a copy record of a performance.
right not to have authorship falsely attributed has the meaning 
given by Division 3.
right not to have performership falsely attributed has the meaning 
given by Division 3A.
right of attribution of authorship has the meaning given by 
Division 2.
right of attribution of performership has the meaning given by 
Division 2A.
right of integrity of authorship has the meaning given by 
Division 4.
right of integrity of performership has the meaning given by 
Division 4A.
screenwriter, in relation to a cinematograph film, means the person 
who wrote the script or screenplay of the film, as that meaning is 
affected by section 191.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 1  Preliminary
sound recording means a sound recording in which copyright 
subsists.
staged, in relation to a live performance, has the meaning given by 
section 191A.
work means a literary work, a dramatic work, a musical work, an 
artistic work or a cinematograph film.
190  Moral rights conferred on individuals
Only individuals have moral rights.
191  Director, producer and screenwriter of cinematograph film
(1) A reference in this Part to the director of a cinematograph film in 
the direction of which 2 or more individuals were involved is a 
reference to the principal director of the film and does not include a 
reference to any subsidiary director, whether described as an 
associate director, line director, assistant director or in any other 
way.
(2) A reference in this Part to the producer of a cinematograph film is 
a reference to:
(a) the individual who was the producer of the film; or
(b) if there were 2 or more individuals involved in the production 
of the film—the individual who was the principal producer of 
the film;
and does not include a reference to any subsidiary producer, 
whether described as an executive producer, associate producer, 
line producer, assistant producer or in any other way.
(3) As only individuals have moral rights (see section 190), if the 
producer of a cinematograph film was a body corporate, the only 
moral rights in respect of the film are those of the director and 
screenwriter.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Preliminary  Division 1
(4) A reference in this Part to the screenwriter of a cinematograph film 
for which 2 or more individuals were involved in the writing of the 
script or screenplay is a reference to the principal screenwriter.
Note: If there were 2 or more principal directors, 2 or more individuals who 
were the principal producers, or 2 or more principal screenwriters, of a 
cinematograph film, section 195AZJ, 195AZK or 195AZL applies.
191A  Staging a performance
For the purposes of this Part, a live performance is staged by the 
person who makes the arrangements necessary for the performance 
(including elements of the performance not consisting of sounds) 
to take place.
191B  Conductor to be treated as a performer
If a performance of a musical work is conducted by a conductor, 
then the sounds of the performance are to be treated as having been 
made by the conductor (as well as by the persons who actually 
made those sounds).
Note: As a consequence, the conductor will be able to be treated as being 
one of the performers. Note, however, the qualified person 
requirement in the definition of performer in section 189.
192  Rights to be additional to other rights
(1) The moral rights of the author of a work are in addition to any 
other rights in relation to the work that the author or anyone else 
has under this Act.
(2) The moral rights of a performer in a live performance or recorded 
performance are in addition to any other rights in relation to the 
performance that the performer or anyone else has under this Act.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 2  Right of attribution of authorship
Division 2—Right of attribution of authorship
193  Author’s right of attribution of authorship
(1) The author of a work has a right of attribution of authorship in 
respect of the work.
(2) The author’s right is the right to be identified in accordance with 
this Division as the author of the work if any of the acts (the 
attributable acts) mentioned in section 194 are done in respect of 
the work.
194  Acts giving rise to right of attribution of authorship
(1) If the work is a literary, dramatic or musical work, the attributable 
acts are the following:
(a) to reproduce the work in a material form;
(b) to publish the work; 
(c) to perform the work in public;
(d) to communicate the work to the public;
(e) to make an adaptation of the work.
(2) If the work is an artistic work, the attributable acts are the 
following:
(a) to reproduce the work in a material form;
(b) to publish the work; 
(c) to exhibit the work to the public;
(d) to communicate the work to the public.
(3) If the work is a cinematograph film, the attributable acts are the 
following:
(a) to make a copy of the film;
(b) to exhibit the film in public;
(c) to communicate the film to the public.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right of attribution of authorship  Division 2
195  Nature of the identification of author
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the author of a work may be identified by 
any reasonable form of identification.
(2) If:
(a) the author of a work has made known, either generally or to a 
person who is required under this Part to identify the author, 
that the author wishes to be identified in a particular way; 
and
(b) the identification of the author in that way is reasonable in 
the circumstances;
the identification is to be made in that way.
195AA  Identification of author to be clear and reasonably 
prominent
An identification of the author of a work must be clear and 
reasonably prominent.
195AB  What is a reasonably prominent identification
When a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is reproduced in 
a material form, an adaptation is made of a literary, dramatic or 
musical work, or a copy of a cinematograph film is made, an 
identification of the author is taken to be reasonably prominent if it 
is included on each reproduction of the work or of the adaptation or 
on each copy of the film, as the case may be, in such a way that a 
person acquiring the reproduction or copy will have notice of the 
author’s identity.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 2A  Right of attribution of performership
Division 2A—Right of attribution of performership
195ABA  Performer’s right of attribution of performership
(1) A performer in a live performance or recorded performance has a 
right of attribution of performership in respect of the performance.
(2) The performer’s right is the right to be identified in accordance 
with this Division as a performer in the performance if any of the 
acts (the attributable acts) mentioned in section 195ABB are done 
in respect of the performance.
Note: If there is more than one performer in a performance, then each 
performer has a right of attribution of performership: see 
subsection 195AZQ(2).
195ABB  Acts giving rise to right of attribution of performership
(1) The attributable acts for a live performance are the following:
(a) communicating the live performance to the public;
(b) staging the live performance in public.
Note: For the definition of staged, see section 191A.
(2) The attributable acts for a recorded performance are the following:
(a) making a copy record of the recorded performance;
(b) communicating the recorded performance to the public.
195ABC  Nature of the identification of performer
(1) Subject to this section, a performer may be identified by any 
reasonable form of identification.
(2) If:
(a) a performer has made known, either generally or to a person 
who is required under this Part to identify the performer, that 
the performer wishes to be identified in a particular way; and
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right of attribution of performership  Division 2A
(b) the identification of the performer in that way is reasonable 
in the circumstances;
the identification is to be made in that way.
(3) If a performance is presented by performers who use a group name, 
then identification by using the group name is sufficient 
identification of the performers in the group.
195ABD  Identification of performer to be clear and reasonably 
prominent or audible
An identification of a performer must be clear and reasonably 
prominent or reasonably audible.
195ABE  What is a reasonably prominent identification
When a copy record is made of a recorded performance, an 
identification of a performer or group of performers is taken to be 
reasonably prominent if it is included on each copy record of the 
recorded performance in such a way that a person acquiring the 
copy record will have notice of the identity of the performer or 
group.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 3  Right not to have authorship of a work falsely attributed
Division 3—Right not to have authorship of a work falsely 
attributed
195AC  Author’s right not to have authorship falsely attributed
(1) The author of a work has a right not to have authorship of the work 
falsely attributed.
(2) The author’s right is the right not to have a person (the attributor) 
do, in respect of the work, any of the acts (the acts of false 
attribution) mentioned in the following provisions of this Division.
195AD  Acts of false attribution of authorship of a literary, dramatic 
or musical work
If the work is a literary, dramatic or musical work, it is an act of 
false attribution in relation to the author of the work:
(a) to insert or affix, or to authorise the inserting or affixing of, a 
person’s name in or on the work, or in or on a reproduction 
of the work, in such a way as:
(i) to imply falsely that the person is the author or an 
author of the work; or
(ii) to imply falsely that the work is an adaptation of a work 
of the person; or
(b) to deal with the work with a person’s name so inserted or 
affixed, if the attributor knows that the person is not an 
author of the work or that the work is not an adaptation of a 
work of the person, as the case may be; or
(c) to deal with a reproduction of the work, being a reproduction 
in or on which a person’s name has been so inserted or 
affixed, if the attributor knows that the person is not an 
author of the work or that the work is not an adaptation of a 
work of the person, as the case may be; or
(d) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the 
public, as being a work of which a person is the author or as 
being an adaptation of a work of a person, if the attributor 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right not to have authorship of a work falsely attributed  Division 3
knows that the person is not an author of the work or that the 
work is not an adaptation of the work of the person, as the 
case may be.
195AE  Acts of false attribution of authorship of artistic work
(1) This section applies if the work is an artistic work.
(2) It is an act of false attribution in relation to the author of the work:
(a) to insert or affix, or to authorise the inserting or affixing of, a 
person’s name in or on the work, or in or on a reproduction 
of the work, or to use, or to authorise the use of, a person’s 
name in connection with the work, or in connection with a 
reproduction of the work, in such a way as to imply falsely 
that the person is an author of the work; or
(b) to deal with the work with a person’s name so inserted or 
affixed, if the attributor knows that the person is not an 
author of the work; or
(c) to deal with a reproduction of the work, being a reproduction 
in or on which a person’s name has been so inserted or 
affixed, if the attributor knows that the person is not an 
author of the work; or
(d) to communicate the work to the public as being a work of 
which a person is the author, if the attributor knows that the 
person is not an author of the work.
195AF  Acts of false attribution of authorship of cinematograph film
(1) This section applies if the work is a cinematograph film.
(2) It is an act of false attribution in relation to the director, producer 
or screenwriter of the film:
(a) to insert or affix, or to authorise the inserting or affixing of, a 
person’s name on the film or on a copy of the film in such a 
way as to imply falsely that the person is the director, 
producer or screenwriter, as the case may be, of the film; or
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 3  Right not to have authorship of a work falsely attributed
(b) to deal with the film or a copy of the film if a person’s name 
has been so inserted or affixed on the film or a copy, as the 
case may be, and the attributor knows that the person is not 
the director, producer or screenwriter, as the case may be, of 
the film; or
(c) to communicate the film to the public as being a film of 
which a person is the director, producer or screenwriter, as 
the case may be, if the attributor knows that the person is not 
the director, producer or screenwriter of the film.
195AG  Acts of false attribution of authorship of altered literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic work
(1) If the work is a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work that has 
been altered by a person other than the author of the work, it is an 
act of false attribution in relation to the author of the work:
(a) to deal with the work as so altered, as being the unaltered 
work of the author; or
(b) to deal with a reproduction of the work as so altered, as being 
a reproduction of the unaltered work of the author;
if, to the knowledge of the attributor, it is not the unaltered work or 
a reproduction of the unaltered work, as the case may be, of the 
author.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a) the effect of the alteration is insubstantial; or
(b) the alteration was required by law to be made, or was 
otherwise necessary to avoid a breach of any law.
195AH  Act of false attribution of authorship of altered 
cinematograph film
(1) If the work is a cinematograph film that has been altered by a 
person other than the maker of the film, it is an act of false 
attribution in relation to the director, the producer and the 
screenwriter of the film to deal with a copy of the film as so 
altered, as being a copy of the unaltered film, if, to the knowledge 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right not to have authorship of a work falsely attributed  Division 3
of the attributor, the copy of the film is not a copy of the unaltered 
film.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a) the effect of the alteration is insubstantial; or
(b) the alteration was required by law to be made, or was 
otherwise necessary to avoid a breach of any law.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 3A  Right not to have performership falsely attributed
Division 3A—Right not to have performership falsely 
attributed
195AHA  Performer’s right not to have performership falsely 
attributed
(1) A performer in a live performance or recorded performance has a 
right not to have performership falsely attributed.
(2) A performer’s right is the right not to have a person (the attributor) 
do, in respect of the live performance or recorded performance (as 
the case may be), any of the acts (the acts of false attribution) 
mentioned in sections 195AHB and 195AHC.
Note: If there is more than one performer in a performance, then each 
performer has a right not to have performership falsely attributed: see 
subsection 195AZQ(3).
195AHB  Acts of false attribution of performership
Acts of false attribution for live performances
(1) For a live performance, it is an act of false attribution for the stager 
of the performance, or a person authorised by the stager, to state 
falsely, or imply falsely, to the audience or intended audience 
immediately before the performance that:
(a) a person is, or will be, a performer in the performance; or
(b) the performance is being, or will be, presented by a particular 
group of performers.
Note: For the definition of staged, see section 191A.
Example 1: The stager of a live performance given by X and Y attributes the 
performance to A and B. This is an act of false attribution in 
relation to both X and Y.
Example 2: The stager of a live performance given by X and Y attributes the 
performance to X and A. This is an act of false attribution in 
relation to both X and Y (even though X is mentioned in the 
attribution).
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right not to have performership falsely attributed  Division 3A
(2) For a live performance, it is an act of false attribution for the stager 
of the performance, or a person authorised by the stager, to state 
falsely, or imply falsely, to the audience during the performance 
that:
(a) a person is, was, or will be a performer in the performance; 
or
(b) the performance is being, was, or will be, presented by a 
particular group of performers.
(3) For a live performance, it is an act of false attribution for the stager 
of the performance, or a person authorised by the stager, to state 
falsely, or imply falsely, to the audience immediately after the 
performance that:
(a) a person was a performer in the performance; or
(b) a particular group of performers presented the performance.
(4) However, doing an act mentioned in subsection (1), (2) or (3) is 
only an act of false attribution if the performance is in public or is 
communicated to the public. For this purpose, any unauthorised 
communication to the public is to be disregarded.
Acts of false attribution for recorded performances—individual 
performers
(5) For a recorded performance, each of the following acts is an act of 
false attribution:
(a) to insert or affix, or authorise the inserting or affixing of, a 
person’s name in or on a record embodying the performance 
in such a way as to imply falsely that the person is a 
performer in the performance;
(b) to deal with a record embodying the performance if:
(i) a person’s name has been inserted or affixed in or on the 
record as mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) the attributor knows that the person is not a performer in 
the performance;
(c) to communicate the recorded performance to the public as 
being a performance in which a person is a performer, if the 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 3A  Right not to have performership falsely attributed
attributor knows that the person is not a performer in the 
performance.
Acts of false attribution for recorded performances—groups of 
performers
(6) For a recorded performance, each of the following acts is an act of 
false attribution:
(a) to insert or affix, or authorise the inserting or affixing of, a 
group name in or on a record embodying the performance in 
such a way as to imply falsely that the group are performers 
in the performance;
(b) to deal with a record embodying the performance if:
(i) a group name has been inserted or affixed in or on the 
record as mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) the attributor knows that the group are not performers in 
the performance;
(c) to communicate the recorded performance to the public as 
being a performance in which a group are performers, if the 
attributor knows that the group are not performers in the 
performance.
Silent performers
(7) It is not an act of false attribution of performership to state that a 
performer who participated silently in a performance performed in 
the performance.
Example: X and Y together present a cabaret act in which X sings and Y dances 
silently. The “performance” for the purposes of this Part consists only 
of the sounds made by X. It is not an act of false attribution in respect 
of the performance to state or imply that Y was also a performer.
195AHC  Act of false attribution of performership of altered 
recorded performance
(1) If the work is a recorded performance that has been altered by a 
person other than a performer in the performance, it is an act of 
false attribution of performership in relation to the performer to 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right not to have performership falsely attributed  Division 3A
deal with a copy of the recorded performance as so altered, as 
being a copy of the unaltered recorded performance, if, to the 
knowledge of the attributor, the copy of the recorded performance 
is not a copy of the unaltered recorded performance.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a) the effect of the alteration is insubstantial; or
(b) the alteration was required by law to be made, or was 
otherwise necessary to avoid a breach of any law.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 4  Right of integrity of authorship of a work
Division 4—Right of integrity of authorship of a work
195AI  Author’s right of integrity of authorship
(1) The author of a work has a right of integrity of authorship in 
respect of the work.
(2) The author’s right is the right not to have the work subjected to 
derogatory treatment.
195AJ  Derogatory treatment of literary, dramatic or musical work
In this Part:
derogatory treatment, in relation to a literary, dramatic or musical 
work, means:
(a) the doing, in relation to the work, of anything that results in a 
material distortion of, the mutilation of, or a material 
alteration to, the work that is prejudicial to the author’s 
honour or reputation; or
(b) the doing of anything else in relation to the work that is 
prejudicial to the author’s honour or reputation.
195AK  Derogatory treatment of artistic work
In this Part:
derogatory treatment, in relation to an artistic work, means:
(a) the doing, in relation to the work, of anything that results in a 
material distortion of, the destruction or mutilation of, or a 
material alteration to, the work that is prejudicial to the 
author’s honour or reputation; or
(b) an exhibition in public of the work that is prejudicial to the 
author’s honour or reputation because of the manner or place 
in which the exhibition occurs; or
(c) the doing of anything else in relation to the work that is 
prejudicial to the author’s honour or reputation.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Right of integrity of authorship of a work  Division 4
195AL  Derogatory treatment of cinematograph film
In this Part:
derogatory treatment, in relation to a cinematograph film, means:
(a) the doing, in relation to the film, of anything that results in a 
material distortion of, the mutilation of, or a material 
alteration to, the film that is prejudicial to the maker’s honour 
or reputation; or
(b) the doing of anything else in relation to the film that is 
prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the maker of the 
film.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 4A  Right of integrity of performership
Division 4A—Right of integrity of performership
195ALA  Performer’s right of integrity of performership
(1) A performer in a live performance or recorded performance has a 
right of integrity of performership in respect of the performance.
(2) The performer’s right is the right not to have the performance 
subjected to derogatory treatment.
Note: If there is more than one performer in a performance, then each 
performer has a right of integrity of performership: see 
subsection 195AZQ(4).
195ALB  Derogatory treatment of performance
In this Part:
derogatory treatment, in relation to a performer in a live 
performance or recorded performance, means the doing, in relation 
to the performance, of anything that results in a material distortion 
of, the mutilation of, or a material alteration to, the performance 
that is prejudicial to the performer’s reputation.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Duration and exercise of moral rights  Division 5
Division 5—Duration and exercise of moral rights
Subdivision A—Duration and exercise of moral rights of 
authors
195AM  Duration of author’s moral rights
(1) An author’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of a 
cinematograph film continues in force until the author dies.
(2) An author’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of a work 
other than a cinematograph film continues in force until copyright 
ceases to subsist in the work.
(3) An author’s moral rights (other than the right of integrity of 
authorship) in respect of a work continue in force until copyright 
ceases to subsist in the work.
195AN  Exercise of author’s moral rights
(1) If the author of a work dies, the author’s moral rights (other than 
the right of integrity of authorship in respect of a cinematograph 
film) in respect of the work may be exercised and enforced by his 
or her legal personal representative.
(2) If the affairs of the author of a work are lawfully administered by 
another person (except under a law for the relief of bankrupt or 
insolvent debtors), the author’s moral rights may be exercised and 
enforced by the person administering his or her affairs.
(3) Subject to this section, a moral right in respect of a work is not 
transmissible by assignment, by will, or by devolution by operation 
of law.
(4) If:
(a) a cinematograph film; or
(b) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work as included in a 
cinematograph film;
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 5  Duration and exercise of moral rights
has 2 or more authors, the authors may enter into a written 
co-authorship agreement by which each of them agrees not to 
exercise his or her right of integrity of authorship in respect of the 
film or work, as the case may be, except jointly with the other 
author or authors.
(5) A co-authorship agreement has effect according to its terms.
Subdivision B—Duration and exercise of moral rights of 
performers
195ANA  Duration of performer’s moral rights for recorded 
performances
(1) A performer’s right of attribution of performership in respect of a 
recorded performance continues in force until copyright ceases to 
subsist in the recorded performance.
(2) A performer’s right not to have performership falsely attributed in 
respect of a recorded performance continues in force until 
copyright ceases to subsist in the recorded performance.
(3) A performer’s right of integrity of performership in respect of a 
recorded performance continues in force until the performer dies.
195ANB  Exercise of performer’s moral rights
(1) If a performer in a live performance or recorded performance dies, 
the performer’s moral rights in respect of the performance may be 
exercised and enforced by his or her legal personal representative.
(2) If the affairs of a performer in a live performance or recorded 
performance are lawfully administered by another person (except 
under a law for the relief of bankrupt or insolvent debtors), the 
performer’s moral rights may be exercised and enforced by the 
person administering his or her affairs.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Duration and exercise of moral rights  Division 5
(3) Subject to this section, a moral right in respect of a live 
performance or recorded performance is not transmissible by 
assignment, by will, or by devolution by operation of law.
(4) If there are 2 or more performers in a live performance or recorded 
performance, then the performers may enter into a written 
co-performership agreement by which each of them agrees not to 
exercise his or her right of integrity of performership in respect of 
the live performance or recorded performance, as the case may be, 
except jointly with the other performer or performers.
(5) A co-performership agreement has effect according to its terms.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
Division 6—Infringement of moral rights
Subdivision A—Infringement of moral rights of authors
195AO  Infringement of right of attribution of authorship
Subject to this Subdivision, a person infringes an author’s right of 
attribution of authorship in respect of a work if the person does, or 
authorises the doing of, an attributable act in respect of the work 
without the identification of the author in accordance with 
Division 2 as the author of the work. 
195AP  Infringement of right not to have authorship falsely 
attributed
Subject to this Subdivision, a person infringes an author’s right not 
to have authorship of a work falsely attributed if the person does an 
act of false attribution in respect of the work. 
195AQ  Infringement of right of integrity of authorship
(1) This section has effect subject to this Subdivision.
(2) A person infringes an author’s right of integrity of authorship in 
respect of a work if the person subjects the work, or authorises the 
work to be subjected, to derogatory treatment.
(3) If a literary, dramatic or musical work has been subjected to 
derogatory treatment of a kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of the 
definition of derogatory treatment in section 195AJ that infringes 
the author’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of the work, 
a person infringes the author’s right of integrity of authorship in 
respect of the work if the person does any of the following in 
respect of the work as so derogatorily treated:
(a) reproduces it in a material form;
(b) publishes it;
(c) performs it in public;
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
(d) communicates it to the public;
(e) makes an adaptation of it.
(4) If an artistic work has been subjected to derogatory treatment of a 
kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of the definition of derogatory 
treatment in section 195AK that infringes the author’s right of 
integrity of authorship in respect of the work, a person infringes the 
author’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of the work if the 
person does any of the following in respect of the work as so 
derogatorily treated:
(a) reproduces it in a material form;
(b) publishes it;
(c) communicates it to the public.
(5) If a cinematograph film has been subjected to derogatory treatment 
of a kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of the definition of 
derogatory treatment in section 195AL that infringes the author’s 
right of integrity of authorship in respect of the film, a person 
infringes the author’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of 
the film if the person does any of the following in respect of the 
film as so derogatorily treated:
(a) makes a copy of it;
(b) exhibits it;
(c) communicates it to the public.
195AR  No infringement of right of attribution of authorship if it was 
reasonable not to identify the author
(1) A person who does, or authorises the doing of, an attributable act 
in respect of a work does not, because the author of the work is not 
identified, infringe the author’s right of attribution of authorship in 
respect of the work if the person establishes that it was reasonable 
in all the circumstances not to identify the author.
(2) The matters to be taken into account in determining for the 
purposes of subsection (1) whether it was reasonable in particular 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
circumstances not to identify the author of a literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work include the following:
(a) the nature of the work;
(b) the purpose for which the work is used;
(c) the manner in which the work is used;
(d) the context in which the work is used;
(e) any practice, in the industry in which the work is used, that is 
relevant to the work or the use of the work;
(f) any practice contained in a voluntary code of practice, in the 
industry in which the work is used, that is relevant to the 
work or the use of the work;
(g) any difficulty or expense that would have been incurred as a 
result of identifying the author;
(h) whether the work was made:
(i) in the course of the author’s employment; or
(ii) under a contract for the performance by the author of 
services for another person;
(i) if the work has 2 or more authors—their views about the 
failure to identify them.
(3) The matters to be taken into account in determining for the 
purposes of subsection (1) whether it was reasonable in particular 
circumstances not to identify the maker of a cinematograph film 
include the following:
(a) the nature of the film;
(b) whether the primary purpose for which the film was made 
was for exhibition at cinemas, for broadcasting by television 
or for some other purpose;
(c) the purpose for which the film is used;
(d) the manner in which the film is used;
(e) the context in which the film is used;
(f) any practice, in the industry in which the film is used, that is 
relevant to the film or the use of the film;
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
(g) any practice contained in a voluntary code of practice, in the 
industry in which the film is used, that is relevant to the film 
or the use of the film;
(h) any difficulty or expense that would have been incurred as a 
result of identifying the maker;
(i) whether the film was made in the course of the employment 
of the director, producer or screenwriter.
195AS  No infringement of right of integrity of authorship if 
derogatory treatment or other action was reasonable
(1) A person does not, by subjecting a work, or authorising a work to 
be subjected, to derogatory treatment, infringe the author’s right of 
integrity of authorship in respect of the work if the person 
establishes that it was reasonable in all the circumstances to subject 
the work to the treatment.
(2) The matters to be taken into account in determining for the 
purposes of subsection (1) whether it was reasonable in particular 
circumstances to subject a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work to derogatory treatment include the following:
(a) the nature of the work;
(b) the purpose for which the work is used;
(c) the manner in which the work is used;
(d) the context in which the work is used;
(e) any practice, in the industry in which the work is used, that is 
relevant to the work or the use of the work;
(f) any practice contained in a voluntary code of practice, in the 
industry in which the work is used, that is relevant to the 
work or the use of the work;
(g) whether the work was made:
(i) in the course of the author’s employment; or
(ii) under a contract for the performance by the author of 
services for another person;
(h) whether the treatment was required by law or was otherwise 
necessary to avoid a breach of any law;
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
(i) if the work has 2 or more authors—their views about the 
treatment.
(3) The matters to be taken into account in determining for the 
purposes of subsection (1) whether it was reasonable in particular 
circumstances to subject a cinematograph film to derogatory 
treatment include the following:
(a) the nature of the film;
(b) whether the primary purpose for which the film was made 
was for exhibition at cinemas, for broadcasting by television 
or for some other use;
(c) the purpose for which the film is used;
(d) the manner in which the film is used;
(e) the context in which the film is used;
(f) any practice, in the industry in which the film is used, that is 
relevant to the film or the use of the film;
(g) any practice contained in a voluntary code of practice, in the 
industry in which the film is used, that is relevant to the film 
or the use of the film;
(h) whether the film was made in the course of the employment 
of the director, producer or screenwriter who alleges that the 
treatment was derogatory;
(i) whether the treatment was required by law or was otherwise 
necessary to avoid a breach of any law.
(4) A person who does any act referred to in subsection 195AQ(3), (4) 
or (5) in respect of a work that has been subjected to derogatory 
treatment of a kind mentioned in that subsection does not, by doing 
that act, infringe the author’s right of integrity of authorship in 
respect of the work if the person establishes that it was reasonable 
in all the circumstances to do that act.
195AT  Certain treatment of works not to constitute an infringement 
of the author’s right of integrity of authorship
(1) The destruction of a moveable artistic work is not an infringement 
of the author’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of the 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
work if the person who destroyed the work gave the author, or a 
person representing the author, a reasonable opportunity to remove 
the work from the place where it was situated.
(2) A change in, or the relocation, demolition or destruction of, a 
building is not an infringement of the author’s right of integrity of 
authorship in respect of an artistic work that is affixed to or forms 
part of the building if:
(a) the owner of the building, after making reasonable inquiries, 
cannot discover the identity and location of the author or a 
person representing the author; or
(b) if paragraph (a) does not apply—the owner complies with 
subsection (2A) in relation to the change, relocation, 
demolition or destruction.
(2A) This subsection is complied with by the owner of a building in 
relation to a change in, or the relocation, demolition or destruction 
of, the building if:
(a) the owner has, in accordance with the regulations and before 
the change, relocation, demolition or destruction is carried 
out, given the author or a person representing the author a 
written notice stating the owner’s intention to carry out the 
change, relocation, demolition or destruction; and
(b) the notice stated that the person to whom the notice was 
given may, within 3 weeks from the date of the notice, seek 
to have access to the work for either or both of the following 
purposes:
(i) making a record of the work;
(ii) consulting in good faith with the owner about the 
change, relocation, demolition or destruction; and
(c) the notice contained such other information and particulars as 
are prescribed; and
(d) where the person to whom the notice was given notifies the 
owner within the period of 3 weeks referred to in 
paragraph (b) that the person wishes to have access to the 
work for either or both of the purposes mentioned in that 
paragraph—the owner has given the person a reasonable 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
opportunity within a further period of 3 weeks to have such 
access; and
(e) where, in the case of a change or relocation, the person to 
whom the notice was given notifies the owner that the person 
requires the removal from the work of the author’s 
identification as the author of the work—the owner has 
complied with the requirement.
(3) A change in, or the relocation, demolition or destruction of, a 
building is not an infringement of the author’s right of integrity of 
authorship in respect of the building, or in respect of any plans or 
instructions used in the construction of the building or a part of the 
building if:
(a) the owner of the building, after making reasonable inquiries, 
cannot discover the identity and location of the author or a 
person representing the author, or of any of the authors or 
persons representing the authors, as the case may be; or
(b) if paragraph (a) does not apply—the owner complies with 
subsection (3A) in relation to the change, relocation, 
demolition or destruction.
(3A) This subsection is complied with by the owner of a building in 
relation to a change in, or the relocation, demolition or destruction 
of, the building if:
(a) the owner has, in accordance with the regulations and before 
the change, relocation, demolition or destruction is carried 
out, given the author or a person representing the author, or 
the authors or the persons representing the authors, whose 
identity and location the owner knows, a written notice 
stating the owner’s intention to carry out the change, 
relocation, demolition or destruction; and
(b) the notice stated that the person to whom the notice was 
given may, within 3 weeks from the date of the notice, seek 
to have access to the building for either or both of the 
following purposes:
(i) making a record of the artistic work;
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
(ii) consulting in good faith with the owner about the 
change, relocation, demolition or destruction; and
(c) the notice contained such other information and particulars as 
are prescribed; and
(d) where the person to whom the notice was given notifies the 
owner within the period of 3 weeks referred to in 
paragraph (b) that the person wishes to have access to the 
building for either or both of the purposes mentioned in that 
paragraph—the owner has given the person a reasonable 
opportunity within a further period of 3 weeks to have such 
access; and
(e) where, in the case of a change or relocation, the person to 
whom the notice was given notifies the owner that the person 
requires the removal from the building of the author’s 
identification as the author of the artistic work—the owner 
has complied with the requirement.
(4) Subsections (2), (2A), (3) and (3A) do not limit the operation of 
section 195AG.
(4A) The removal or relocation by a person (the remover) of a moveable 
artistic work that is situated at a place that is accessible to the 
public, and was made for installation in that place, is not an 
infringement of the author’s right of integrity of authorship in 
respect of the work if the remover:
(a) after making reasonable inquiries, cannot discover the 
identity and location of the author or a person representing 
the author; or
(b) if paragraph (a) does not apply—complies with 
subsection (4B) in relation to the removal or relocation.
(4B) This subsection is complied with by the remover in relation to the 
removal or relocation of a moveable artistic work if:
(a) the remover has, in accordance with the regulations and 
before the removal or relocation is carried out, given the 
author or a person representing the author a written notice 
stating the remover’s intention to carry out the removal or 
relocation; and
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
(b) the notice stated that the person to whom the notice was 
given may, within 3 weeks from the date of the notice, seek 
to have access to the work for either or both of the following 
purposes:
(i) making a record of the work;
(ii) consulting in good faith with the remover about the 
removal or relocation; and
(c) the notice contained such other information and particulars as 
are prescribed; and
(d) where the person to whom the notice was given notifies the 
remover within the period of 3 weeks referred to in 
paragraph (b) that the person wishes to have access to the 
work for either or both of the purposes mentioned in that 
paragraph—the remover has given the person a reasonable 
opportunity within a further period of 3 weeks to have such 
access; and
(e) where the person to whom the notice was given notifies the 
remover that the person requires the removal from the work 
of the author’s identification as the author of the work—the 
remover has complied with the requirement.
(5) Anything done in good faith to restore or preserve a work is not, by 
that act alone, an infringement of the author’s right of integrity of 
authorship in respect of the work.
195AU  Infringement by importation for sale or other dealing
(1) An author’s moral right in respect of a work is infringed by a 
person who imports an article into Australia for the purpose of 
dealing with the article if the importer knew, or ought reasonably 
to have known, that, if the article had been made in Australia, it 
would have been an infringing article.
(2) In subsection (1):
dealing with does not include distributing except where the 
proposed distribution is for the purposes of sale.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
195AV  Infringement by sale and other dealings
(1) An author’s moral right in respect of a work is infringed by a 
person who, in Australia, deals with an article if the person knew, 
or ought reasonably to have known, that the article was an 
infringing article or, in respect of an imported article, would, if it 
had been made in Australia, have been an infringing article.
(2) In subsection (1):
deals with does not include:
(a) distributes, except where the distribution is for the purposes 
of sale; or
(b) deals with by means of a dealing covered by 
paragraph 195AD(b), 195AD(c), 195AE(2)(b), 195AE(2)(c) 
or 195AF (2)(b) or subsection 195AG(1) or 195AH(1); or
(c) deals with by means of an exhibition that is an attributable 
act to which section 195AO applies or an exhibition to which 
subsection 195AQ(5) applies.
195AVA  Matters to be taken into account
In determining whether a person has authorised the doing of an act 
that is an infringement of moral rights in respect of a work, the 
matters that must be taken into account include the following:
(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing 
of the act concerned;
(b) the nature of any relationship existing between the person 
and the person who did the act concerned;
(c) whether the person took any reasonable steps to prevent or 
avoid the doing of the act, including whether the person 
complied with any relevant industry codes of practice.
195AVB  Communication by use of certain facilities
A person (including a carrier or carriage service provider) who 
provides facilities for making, or facilitating the making of, a 
communication is not taken to have authorised the doing of an act 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
that is an infringement of moral rights in respect of a work merely 
because another person uses the facilities so provided to do such an 
act.
195AW  Author’s consent to act or omission—films or works in films
(1A) This section applies to a work that is:
(a) a cinematograph film; or
(b) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work as included in a 
cinematograph film.
(1) It is not an infringement of a moral right of an author in respect of 
a work to do, or omit to do, something if the act or omission is 
within the scope of a written consent given by the author or a 
person representing the author.
(2) A consent may be given in relation to all or any acts or omissions 
occurring before or after the consent is given.
(3) A consent may be given in relation to:
(a) a specified work or specified works existing when the 
consent is given; or
(b) a work or works of a particular description:
(i) the making of which has not begun; or
(ii) that is or are in the course of being made.
(4) A consent may be given by an employee for the benefit of his or 
her employer in relation to all works made or to be made by the 
employee in the course of his or her employment.
(5) A consent given for the benefit of the owner or prospective owner 
of copyright in the work or works to which it relates is presumed, 
unless the contrary intention appears in the consent instrument, to 
extend to his or her licensees and successors in title, and to any 
persons who are authorised by the owner or prospective owner, or 
by such a licensee or successor in title, to do acts comprised in the 
copyright.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
(6) Subsections (2) to (5), inclusive, do not limit the operation of 
subsection (1).
195AWA  Author’s consent to act or omission—work that is not a 
film or included in a film
(1) This section applies to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work 
other than such a work as included in a cinematograph film.
(2) It is not an infringement of a moral right of an author in respect of 
a work to do, or omit to do, something if the act or omission is 
within the scope of a written consent genuinely given by the author 
or a person representing the author.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), a consent does not have any effect unless 
it is given:
(a) in relation to specified acts or omissions, or specified classes 
or types of acts or omissions, whether occurring before or 
after the consent is given; and
(b) in relation to either of the following:
(i) a specified work or specified works existing when the 
consent is given; or
(ii) a specified work, or works of a particular description, 
the making of which has not begun or that is or are in 
the course of being made.
(4) A consent may be given by an employee for the benefit of his or 
her employer in relation to all or any acts or omissions (whether 
occurring before or after the consent is given) and in relation to all 
works made or to be made by the employee in the course of his or 
her employment.
(5) A consent given for the benefit of the owner or prospective owner 
of copyright in the work or works to which it relates is presumed, 
unless the contrary intention appears in the consent instrument, to 
extend to his or her licensees and successors in title, and to any 
persons who are authorised by the owner or prospective owner, or 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
by such a licensee or successor in title, to do acts comprised in the 
copyright.
195AWB  Consent invalidated by duress or false or misleading 
statements
(1) If a person applies duress to an author, or to a person representing 
an author, in connection with the giving of a consent for the 
purposes of section 195AW or 195AWA, the consent does not 
have any effect.
(2) If:
(a) a person makes a statement to another person; and
(b) the person makes the statement knowing:
(i) that the statement is false or misleading in a material 
particular; or
(ii) that a matter or thing has been omitted from the 
statement without which the statement is false or 
misleading in a material particular; and
(c) the person makes the statement with the intention of 
persuading the other person to give, or not to give, a consent 
for the purposes of section 195AW or 195AWA;
the consent does not have any effect.
195AX  Acts or omissions outside Australia
It is not an infringement of an author’s moral right in respect of a 
work to do, or omit to do, something outside Australia.
Subdivision B—Infringement of moral rights of performers
195AXA  Infringement of right of attribution of performership
Subject to this Subdivision, a person infringes a performer’s right 
of attribution of performership in respect of a live performance or 
recorded performance if the person does, or authorises the doing 
of, an attributable act in respect of the performance without the 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
identification of the performer in accordance with Division 2A as a 
performer in the performance.
195AXB  Infringement of right not to have performership falsely 
attributed
Subject to this Subdivision, a person infringes a performer’s right 
not to have performership falsely attributed if the person does an 
act of false attribution in respect of the performance.
195AXC  Infringement of right of integrity of performership
(1) This section has effect subject to this Subdivision.
(2) A person infringes a performer’s right of integrity of performership 
in respect of a live performance or recorded performance if the 
person subjects the performance, or authorises the performance to 
be subjected, to derogatory treatment.
(3) If a live performance, as affected by derogatory treatment, has 
become a recorded performance, then a person infringes a 
performer’s right of integrity of performership in respect of the live 
performance if the person does any of the following in respect of 
the recorded performance:
(a) makes a copy record of the recorded performance;
(b) communicates the recorded performance to the public;
(c) causes the recorded performance to be heard in public.
(4) If a recorded performance has been subjected to derogatory 
treatment, then a person infringes a performer’s right of integrity of 
performership in respect of the recorded performance if the person 
does any of the following in respect of the recorded performance 
(as affected by the derogatory treatment):
(a) makes a copy record of the recorded performance;
(b) communicates the recorded performance to the public;
(c) causes the recorded performance to be heard in public.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
195AXD  No infringement of right of attribution of performership if 
it was reasonable not to identify the performer
(1) A person who does, or authorises the doing of, an attributable act 
in respect of a live performance or recorded performance does not, 
because a performer in the performance is not identified, infringe 
the performer’s right of attribution of performership in respect of 
the performance if the person establishes that it was reasonable in 
all the circumstances not to identify the performer.
(2) The matters to be taken into account in determining for the 
purposes of subsection (1) whether it was reasonable in particular 
circumstances not to identify a performer in a live performance or 
recorded performance include the following:
(a) the nature of the performance;
(b) the purpose for which the performance is used;
(c) the manner in which the performance is used;
(d) the context in which the performance is used;
(e) any practice, in the industry in which the performance is 
used, that is relevant to the performance or to the use of the 
performance;
(f) any practice contained in a voluntary code of practice, in the 
industry in which the performance is used, that is relevant to 
the performance or to the use of the performance;
(g) any difficulty or expense that would have been incurred as a 
result of identifying the performer;
(h) whether the performer participated in the performance in the 
course of the employment of the performer.
Note: For example, a performance may be used to attract custom in a hotel 
or restaurant.
195AXE  No infringement of right of integrity of performership if 
derogatory treatment or other action was reasonable
(1) A person does not, by subjecting a live performance or recorded 
performance to derogatory treatment, or by authorising a live 
performance or recorded performance to be subjected to derogatory 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
treatment, infringe a performer’s right of integrity of performership 
in respect of the performance if the person establishes that it was 
reasonable in all the circumstances to subject the performance to 
the treatment.
(2) The matters to be taken into account in determining for the 
purposes of subsection (1) whether it was reasonable in particular 
circumstances to subject a live performance or recorded 
performance to derogatory treatment include the following:
(a) the nature of the performance;
(b) the purpose for which the performance is used;
(c) the manner in which the performance is used;
(d) any practice, in the industry in which the performance is 
used, that is relevant to the performance or to the use of the 
performance;
(e) any practice contained in a voluntary code of practice, in the 
industry in which the performance is used, that is relevant to 
the performance or to the use of the performance;
(f) whether the performer who alleges that the treatment was 
derogatory participated in the performance in the course of 
the employment of the performer;
(g) whether the treatment was required by law or was otherwise 
necessary to avoid a breach of any law.
Note: For example, a performance may be used to attract custom in a hotel 
or restaurant.
(3) A person who:
(a) does an act referred to in subsection 195AXC(3) in respect of 
a live performance that has been subjected to derogatory 
treatment; or
(b) does an act referred to in subsection 195AXC(4) in respect of 
a recorded performance that has been subjected to derogatory 
treatment;
does not, by doing that act, infringe a performer’s right of integrity 
of performership in respect of the performance if the person 
establishes that it was reasonable in all the circumstances to do that 
act.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
195AXF  Infringement by importation for sale or other dealing
(1) A performer’s moral right in respect of a live performance or 
recorded performance is infringed by a person who imports an 
article into Australia for the purpose of dealing with the article if 
the importer knew, or ought reasonably to have known, that, if the 
article had been made in Australia, it would have been an 
infringing article.
(2) In subsection (1):
dealing with does not include distributing except where the 
proposed distribution is for the purposes of sale.
195AXG  Infringement by sale and other dealings
(1) A performer’s moral right in respect of a live performance or 
recorded performance is infringed by a person who, in Australia, 
deals with an article if the person knew, or ought reasonably to 
have known, that the article was an infringing article or, in respect 
of an imported article, would, if it had been made in Australia, 
have been an infringing article.
(2) In subsection (1):
deals with does not include:
(a) distributes, except where the distribution is for the purposes 
of sale; or
(b) deals with by means of a dealing covered by 
paragraph 195AHB(5)(b) or (6)(b).
195AXH  Matters to be taken into account
In determining whether a person has authorised the doing of an act 
that is an infringement of moral rights in a live performance or 
recorded performance, the matters that must be taken into account 
include the following:
(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing 
of the act concerned;
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Infringement of moral rights  Division 6
(b) the nature of any relationship existing between the person 
and the person who did the act concerned;
(c) whether the person took any reasonable steps to prevent or 
avoid the doing of the act, including whether the person 
complied with any relevant industry codes of practice.
195AXI  Communication by use of certain facilities
A person (including a carrier or carriage service provider) who 
provides facilities for making, or facilitating the making of, a 
communication is not taken to have authorised the doing of an act 
that is an infringement of moral rights in a live performance or 
recorded performance merely because another person uses the 
facilities so provided to do such an act.
195AXJ  Performer’s consent to act or omission
(1) It is not an infringement of a performer’s moral right in respect of a 
live performance or recorded performance to do, or omit to do, 
something if the act or omission is within the scope of a written 
consent given by the performer or a person representing the 
performer.
Note: The consent of one performer does not affect the moral rights of any 
other performer: see subsection 195AZQ(5).
(2) A consent may be given in relation to all or any acts or omissions 
occurring before or after the consent is given.
(3) A consent may be given in relation to:
(a) a specified performance or specified performances occurring 
before the consent is given; or
(b) a performance or performances of a particular description:
(i) that have not yet occurred; or
(ii) that are in the course of occurring.
(4) A consent may be given by an employee for the benefit of his or 
her employer in relation to all performances in which the employee 
is to be a performer in the course of his or her employment.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 6  Infringement of moral rights
(5) A consent given for the benefit of the owner or prospective owner 
of copyright in the recorded performance or recorded performances 
to which the consent relates is presumed, unless the contrary 
intention appears in the consent instrument, to extend to his or her 
licensees and successors in title, and to any persons who are 
authorised by the owner or prospective owner, or by such a 
licensee or successor in title, to do acts comprised in the copyright.
(6) Subsections (2) to (5), inclusive, do not limit the operation of 
subsection (1).
195AXK  Consent invalidated by duress or false or misleading 
statements
(1) If a person applies duress to a performer or, if a performer is 
represented by a person, to the person representing the performer, 
in connection with the giving of a consent for the purposes of 
section 195AXJ, the consent does not have any effect.
(2) If:
(a) a person makes a statement to another person; and
(b) the person makes the statement knowing:
(i) that the statement is false or misleading in a material 
particular; or
(ii) that a matter or thing has been omitted from the 
statement without which the statement is false or 
misleading in a material particular; and
(c) the person makes the statement with the intention of 
persuading the other person to give, or not to give, a consent 
for the purposes of section 195AXJ;
the consent does not have any effect.
195AXL  Acts or omissions outside Australia
It is not an infringement of a performer’s moral right in respect of a 
live performance or recorded performance to do, or omit to do, 
something outside Australia.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Remedies for infringements of moral rights  Division 7
Division 7—Remedies for infringements of moral rights
Subdivision A—Remedies for infringement of moral rights of 
authors
195AY  Definition etc.
(1) In this Subdivision:
action means a proceeding of a civil nature between parties, and 
includes a counterclaim.
(2) In the application of this Subdivision in relation to a counterclaim, 
references to the defendant are taken to be references to the 
plaintiff.
195AZ  Actions for infringement of author’s moral rights
If a person infringes any of the moral rights of an author in respect 
of a work, the infringement is not an offence but the author or a 
person representing the author may bring an action in respect of the 
infringement, subject to any co-authorship agreement in force 
under section 195AN to which the author is a party.
195AZA  Remedies for infringements of author’s moral rights
(1) Subject to section 203, the relief that a court may grant in an action 
for an infringement of any of an author’s moral rights in respect of 
a work includes any one or more of the following:
(a) an injunction (subject to any terms that the court thinks fit); 
(b) damages for loss resulting from the infringement;
(c) a declaration that a moral right of the author has been 
infringed;
(d) an order that the defendant make a public apology for the 
infringement;
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 7  Remedies for infringements of moral rights
(e) an order that any false attribution of authorship, or 
derogatory treatment, of the work be removed or reversed.
(2) In exercising its discretion as to the appropriate relief to be granted, 
the court may take into account any of the following:
(a) whether the defendant was aware, or ought reasonably to 
have been aware, of the author’s moral rights;
(b) the effect on the author’s honour or reputation resulting from 
any damage to the work;
(c) the number, and categories, of people who have seen or heard 
the work;
(d) anything done by the defendant to mitigate the effects of the 
infringement;
(e) if the moral right that was infringed was a right of attribution 
of authorship—any cost or difficulty that would have been 
associated with identifying the author;
(f) any cost or difficulty in removing or reversing any false 
attribution of authorship, or derogatory treatment, of the 
work.
(3) In deciding whether or not to grant an injunction under 
subsection (1), the court must consider whether the parties have 
made any attempt to negotiate a settlement of the action and 
whether it should adjourn the hearing or further hearing of the 
action for the purpose of giving the parties an appropriate 
opportunity to negotiate a settlement, whether through a process of 
mediation or otherwise.
(4) If:
(a) the work is a cinematograph film; and
(b) the action is brought by a person who is a screenwriter of the 
film; and
(c) the relief granted in the action consists of or includes 
damages; and
(d) the person has already been granted relief by way of damages 
in an action for an infringement of his or her moral rights as 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Remedies for infringements of moral rights  Division 7
an author of the dramatic work constituted by the script or 
screenplay for the film;
the amount of any damages that, apart from this subsection, would 
be awarded to the person in the action referred to in paragraph (b) 
is to be reduced by the amount of the damages awarded to the 
person in the action referred to in paragraph (d).
(5) If:
(a) the work is a dramatic work constituted by the screenplay or 
script for a cinematograph film; and
(b) the action is brought by a person who is an author of the 
screenplay or script; and
(c) the relief granted in the action consists of or includes 
damages; and
(d) the person has already been granted relief by way of damages 
in an action for an infringement of his or her moral rights as a 
screenwriter of the film;
the amount of any damages that, apart from this subsection, would 
be awarded to the person in the action referred to in paragraph (b) 
is to be reduced by the amount of the damages awarded to the 
person in the action referred to in paragraph (d).
(6) If, in respect of an act done after the death of an author of a work, 
damages are recovered under this section by the legal personal 
representative of the author, those damages devolve as if they 
formed part of the author’s estate and as if the right of action in 
respect of the doing of the act had subsisted, and had been vested 
in the author, immediately before his or her death.
Note: Subsection (6) does not apply in relation to the right of integrity of 
authorship in respect of a cinematograph film, which ends on the 
author’s death. See subsection 195AM(1).
195AZD  Presumption as to subsistence of copyright
In an action brought under this Part for an infringement of a moral 
right in respect of a work, copyright is presumed to subsist in the 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 7  Remedies for infringements of moral rights
work if the defendant does not put in issue the question whether 
copyright subsists in the work.
195AZE  Presumption as to subsistence of author’s moral rights
In an action brought under this Part for an infringement of a moral 
right in respect of a work, if copyright is presumed or proved to 
have subsisted in the work when the infringement is alleged to 
have occurred, the moral right is presumed to have subsisted in the 
work at that time.
195AZF  Presumptions in relation to authorship of work
(1) Section 127 applies in respect of an action brought under this Part.
(2) If a name purporting to be the name of the director, producer or 
screenwriter of a cinematograph film appeared on copies of the 
film that were issued when the film was made, then, in an action 
brought under this Part, the person whose name so appeared is, if it 
was his or her true name or a name by which he or she was 
commonly known, presumed, unless the contrary is established, to 
be the director, producer or screenwriter, as the case may be, of the 
film.
195AZG  Other presumptions in relation to literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work
Sections 128 and 129 apply in respect of an action brought under 
this Part.
Subdivision B—Remedies for infringement of moral rights of 
performers
195AZGA  Definition etc.
(1) In this Subdivision:
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Remedies for infringements of moral rights  Division 7
action means a proceeding of a civil nature between parties, and 
includes a counterclaim.
(2) In the application of this Subdivision in relation to a counterclaim, 
references to the defendant are taken to be references to the 
plaintiff.
195AZGB  Actions for infringement of performer’s moral rights
If a person infringes any of the moral rights of a performer in 
respect of a live performance or recorded performance, then the 
performer or a person representing the performer may bring an 
action in respect of the infringement, subject to any 
co-performership agreement in force under section 195ANB to 
which the performer is a party.
195AZGC  Remedies for infringements of performer’s moral rights
(1) Subject to section 203, the relief that a court may grant in an action 
for an infringement of any of a performer’s moral rights in respect 
of a live performance or recorded performance includes any one or 
more of the following:
(a) an injunction (subject to any terms that the court thinks fit);
(b) damages for loss resulting from the infringement;
(c) a declaration that a moral right of the performer has been 
infringed;
(d) an order that the defendant make a public apology for the 
infringement;
(e) an order that any false attribution of performership, or 
derogatory treatment, of the performance be removed or 
reversed.
(2) In exercising its discretion as to the appropriate relief to be granted, 
the court may take into account any of the following:
(a) whether the defendant was aware, or ought reasonably to 
have been aware, of the performer’s moral rights;
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 7  Remedies for infringements of moral rights
(b) the effect on the performer’s reputation resulting from any 
damage to the performance;
(c) the number, and categories, of people who have heard the 
performance;
(d) anything done by the defendant to mitigate the effects of the 
infringement;
(e) if the moral right that was infringed was a right of attribution 
of performership—any cost or difficulty that would have 
been associated with identifying the performer;
(f) any cost or difficulty in removing or reversing any false 
attribution of performership, or derogatory treatment, of the 
performance.
(3) In deciding whether or not to grant an injunction under 
subsection (1), the court must consider whether the parties have 
made any attempt to negotiate a settlement of the action and 
whether it should adjourn the hearing or further hearing of the 
action for the purpose of giving the parties an appropriate 
opportunity to negotiate a settlement, whether through a process of 
mediation or otherwise.
(4) If, after the death of a performer, in respect of an act done in a live 
performance or recorded performance, damages are recovered 
under this section by the legal personal representative of the 
performer, those damages devolve as if they formed part of the 
performer’s estate and as if the right of action in respect of the 
doing of the act had subsisted, and had been vested in the 
performer, immediately before his or her death.
Note: Subsection (4) does not apply in relation to the right of integrity of 
performership, which ends on the performer’s death: see 
section 195ANA.
195AZGD  Presumption as to subsistence of copyright
In an action brought under this Part for an infringement of a moral 
right in respect of a recorded performance, copyright is presumed 
to subsist in the recorded performance if the defendant does not put 
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Remedies for infringements of moral rights  Division 7
in issue the question whether copyright subsists in the recorded 
performance.
195AZGE  Presumption as to subsistence of performer’s moral 
rights
(1) In an action brought under this Part for an infringement of a moral 
right in respect of a recorded performance, if copyright is 
presumed or proved to have subsisted in the recorded performance 
when the infringement is alleged to have occurred, then the moral 
right is presumed to have subsisted in the recorded performance at 
that time.
(2) This section has effect subject to subsection 195ANA(3).
195AZGF  Presumptions in relation to performership
(1) If a name purporting to be the name of a performer appears on a 
record embodying a performance so as to indicate that the person 
was a performer in the performance, then, in an action brought 
under this Part, the person whose name so appeared is, if it was his 
or her true name or a name by which he or she was commonly 
known, presumed, unless the contrary is established, to be a 
performer in the performance.
(2) If a name purporting to be the name of a group of performers 
appears on a record embodying a performance so as to indicate that 
the group performed in the performance, then, in an action brought 
under this Part, the group whose name so appeared is, if it was a 
name by which the group was commonly known, presumed, unless 
the contrary is established, to have performed in the performance.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 7  Remedies for infringements of moral rights
Subdivision C—Miscellaneous
195AZGG  Saving of other rights and remedies
(1) Subject to this section, this Part does not affect any right of action 
or other remedy, whether civil or criminal, in proceedings brought 
otherwise than under this Part.
(2) Any damages recovered in proceedings brought under this Part are 
to be taken into account in assessing damages in proceedings 
brought otherwise than under this Part and arising out of the same 
event or transaction.
(3) Any damages recovered in proceedings brought otherwise than 
under this Part are to be taken into account in proceedings brought 
under this Part and arising out of the same event or transaction.
195AZGH  Jurisdiction of courts
(1) The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory in a 
matter arising under this Part is to be exercised by a single Judge of 
the Court.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), a decision of a court of a State or 
Territory (however constituted) under this Part is final.
(3) An appeal lies from a decision of a court of a State or Territory 
under this Part:
(a) to the Federal Court of Australia; or
(b) by special leave of the High Court, to the High Court.
(4) The Federal Court of Australia has jurisdiction with respect to 
matters arising under this Part.
(5) The Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) has 
jurisdiction with respect to matters arising under this Part.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Miscellaneous  Division 8
Division 8—Miscellaneous
Subdivision A—Miscellaneous provisions about moral rights of 
authors
195AZH  Parts of works
Moral rights in respect of a work apply in relation to a whole or a 
substantial part of the work.
195AZI  Works of joint authorship
(1) This section applies to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work 
that is a work of joint authorship.
(2) The right of attribution of authorship in respect of the work is a 
right of each joint author to be identified as a joint author.
(3) An act of false attribution in respect of the work infringes the right 
of each joint author not to have authorship of the work falsely 
attributed.
(4) The right of integrity of authorship in respect of the work is a right 
of each joint author.
(5) The consent of one joint author to any act or omission affecting his 
or her moral rights in respect of the work does not affect the moral 
rights of the other joint author or other joint authors in respect of 
the work.
195AZJ  Cinematograph films that have more than one principal 
director
(1) This section applies to a cinematograph film that has more than 
one principal director.
(2) The director’s right of attribution of authorship in respect of the 
film is a right of each director to be identified as a director.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 8  Miscellaneous
(3) An act of false attribution in respect of the direction of the film 
infringes the right of each director not to have the direction of the 
film falsely attributed.
(4) The director’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of the film 
is a right of each director.
(5) The consent of one director to any act or omission affecting his or 
her moral rights in respect of the film does not affect the moral 
rights of the other director or other directors in respect of the film.
195AZK  Cinematograph films that have more than one principal 
producer
(1) This section applies to a cinematograph film of which more than 
one individual is the principal producer.
(2) The producer’s right of attribution of authorship in respect of the 
film is a right of each producer to be identified as a producer.
(3) An act of false attribution in respect of the production of the film 
infringes the right of each producer not to have the production of 
the film falsely attributed.
(4) The producer’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of the 
film is a right of each producer.
(5) The consent of one producer to any act or omission affecting his or 
her moral rights in respect of the film does not affect the moral 
rights of the other producer or other producers in respect of the 
film.
195AZL  Cinematograph films that have more than one principal 
screenwriter
(1) This section applies to a cinematograph film of which there is more 
than one principal screenwriter.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Miscellaneous  Division 8
(2) The screenwriter’s right of attribution of authorship in respect of 
the film is a right of each screenwriter to be identified as a 
screenwriter.
(3) An act of false attribution of authorship in respect of the script or 
screenplay of the film infringes the right of each screenwriter not 
to have the authorship of the script or screenplay of the film falsely 
attributed.
(4) The screenwriter’s right of integrity of authorship in respect of the 
film is a right of each screenwriter.
(5) The consent of one screenwriter to any act or omission affecting 
his or her moral rights in respect of the film does not affect the 
moral rights of the other screenwriter or other screenwriters in 
respect of the film.
195AZM  Application—right of attribution of authorship
(1) The right of attribution of authorship in respect of:
(a) a cinematograph film; or
(b) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work as included in a 
cinematograph film;
subsists only if the cinematograph film is made after the 
commencement of this Part.
(2) The right of attribution of authorship in respect of a literary, 
dramatic, musical or artistic work other than such a work as 
included in a cinematograph film subsists in respect of a work 
made before or after the commencement of this Part but this Part 
only applies in relation to attributable acts done after that 
commencement.
Note: Subsection 22(1) explains when a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work is taken to be made and paragraph 22(4)(a) explains when a 
cinematograph film is taken to be made.
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 8  Miscellaneous
195AZN  Application—right not to have authorship falsely 
attributed
(1) The right not to have authorship falsely attributed subsists in 
respect of a work made before or after the commencement of this 
Part but this Part only applies in relation to acts of false attribution 
done after that commencement.
(2) Paragraph 195AD(b) or (c), 195AE(2)(b) or (c) or 195AF(2)(b) 
applies to an act of false attribution done after the commencement 
of this Part even if the name concerned was inserted or affixed 
before that commencement.
Note: Subsection 22(1) explains when a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work is taken to be made and paragraph 22(4)(a) explains when a 
cinematograph film is taken to be made.
195AZO  Application—right of integrity of authorship
(1) The right of integrity of authorship in respect of:
(a) a cinematograph film; or
(b) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work as included in a 
cinematograph film;
subsists only if the cinematograph film is made after the 
commencement of this Part.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the right of integrity of authorship in 
respect of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, other than 
such a work as included in a cinematograph film, subsists in 
respect of a work made before or after the commencement of this 
Part.
(3) This Part applies in relation to an infringement of a right of 
integrity of authorship that subsists in respect of a work referred to 
in subsection (2) that was made before the commencement of this 
Part only if the infringement occurs after the commencement of 
this Part. However, an act referred to in paragraph 195AQ(3)(a), 
(b), (c), (d) or (e) or (4)(a), (b) or (c) is not an infringement if the 
relevant derogatory treatment occurred before that commencement.
  
Moral rights of performers and of authors of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works 
Miscellaneous  Division 8
Note: Subsection 22(1) explains when a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
work is taken to be made and paragraph 22(4)(a) explains when a 
cinematograph film is taken to be made.
Subdivision B—Miscellaneous provisions about moral rights of 
performers
195AZP  Parts of performances
Moral rights in respect of a live performance or recorded 
performance apply in relation to the whole or a substantial part of 
the performance.
195AZQ  Performances that have more than one performer
(1) This section applies to a live performance or recorded performance 
that has more than one performer.
(2) A performer’s right of attribution of performership in respect of the 
performance is a right of the performer to be identified as a 
performer.
Example: If X and Y are the performers in a performance, then each of them has 
the right to be identified. However, there is no infringement of X’s 
moral right if Y is not identified (and vice versa).
Note: See also subsection 195ABC(3), which relates to the use of group 
names.
(3) An act of false attribution of performership in respect of the 
performance infringes each performer’s right not to have 
performership falsely attributed.
Example: X and Y are the performers in a performance that is falsely attributed 
to X and Z. This false attribution infringes X’s moral right and Y’s 
moral right.
(4) The right of integrity of performership in respect of the 
performance is a right of each performer.
Example: X and Y are the performers in a performance. The performance is 
subjected to derogatory treatment that is prejudicial to X’s reputation 
but not to Y’s reputation. The result is an infringement of X’s right of 
  
artistic works and cinematograph films
Division 8  Miscellaneous
integrity of performership but not an infringement of Y’s right of 
integrity of performership.
(5) The consent of one performer to any act or omission affecting his 
or her moral rights in respect of the performance does not affect the 
moral rights of any other performer in respect of the performance.
195AZR  Application
(1) Moral rights in respect of a live performance only subsist in a live 
performance that occurs after the commencement of this section.
(2) Moral rights in respect of a recorded performance only subsist if 
the live performance concerned occurs after the commencement of 
this section.
  
Interpretation  Division 1
Part X—Miscellaneous
Division 1—Interpretation
195A  Interpretation
(1) In this Part (other than subsection 203H(5)), officer in charge 
means:
(a) in relation to archives—the person holding, or performing the 
duties of, the office or position in the service of the body 
administering the archives the duties of which involve that 
person having direct responsibility for the maintenance of, 
and the provision of services in relation to, the collection 
comprising the archives;
(b) in relation to a central records authority—the person holding, 
or performing the duties of, the office in the service of the 
body administering the authority the duties of which involve 
that person having direct responsibility for the maintenance 
of, and the provision of services in relation to, the records 
deposited with the authority; and
(c) in relation to a library—the officer holding, or performing the 
duties of, the office or position in the service of the body 
administering the library the duties of which involve that 
person having direct responsibility for the maintenance of, 
and the provision of services in relation to, the collection 
comprising the library.
(3) A reference in this Part to an educational institution includes a 
reference to an institution that has at any time been an educational 
institution.
(4) A reference in this Part to an institution includes a reference to a 
school of nursing, an undertaking within a hospital, a teacher 
education centre and an undertaking within a body administering 
an educational institution.
  
Division 2  Review
Division 2—Review
195B  Review of certain decisions
(1) For the purposes of this section, the following decisions are 
reviewable decisions:
(ba) a decision of the Comptroller-General of Customs under 
subsection 135(6A) to declare a notice given under 
subsection 135(2) to be ineffective;
(c) a decision of the Comptroller-General of Customs under 
section 135AA refusing to seize copies under 
subsection 135(7);
(ca) a decision of the Comptroller-General of Customs under 
section 135AEC refusing to allow a late claim for the release 
of seized copies;
(cb) a decision of the Comptroller-General of Customs under 
section 135AJ refusing to seize copies under 
subsection 135(7);
(d) a decision of the Comptroller-General of Customs not to give 
permission under subsection 135AD(1);
(e) a decision of the Minister under paragraph 113V(2)(b), 
135ZZT(1A)(b) or 135ZZZO(2)(b) refusing to declare a 
body as a collecting society;
(f) a decision of the Minister under paragraph 113X(2)(a), 
135ZZU(2)(a) or 135ZZZP(2)(a) revoking a declaration of a 
body as a collecting society.
(3) If the Comptroller-General of Customs makes a reviewable 
decision referred to in paragraphs (1)(ba) to (d), the 
Comptroller-General of Customs must cause to be sent to the 
objector or importer whose interests are affected by the decision a 
notice containing:
(a) the terms of the decision; and
(b) a statement to the effect that the objector or importer, as the 
case may be, may request a statement of reasons under 
section 268 of the Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024.
  
Review  Division 2
(4) Failure to include in a notice under subsection (3) a statement of 
the kind referred to in paragraph (3)(b) does not affect the validity 
of the decision to which the notice relates.
(5) Application may be made to the Administrative Review Tribunal 
for review of a reviewable decision.
(8) In this section:
decision has the same meaning as in the Administrative Review 
Tribunal Act 2024.
  
Division 3  National Library of Australia
Division 3—National Library of Australia
195CA  Simplified outline
Persons publishing certain literary, dramatic, musical or artistic 
works in Australia must deliver copies of the works to the National 
Library. The National Library may also request the delivery of 
works that are available online.
195CB  Copy of certain material to be delivered to the Library
Material published but not available online
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person publishes National Library material in Australia 
on a particular day, but not in such a way that makes the 
material available online; and
(b) the person is not requested under section 195CC, during the 
period of 1 month starting on that day, to cause a copy of the 
material to be delivered under section 195CD; and
(c) the person contravenes section 195CD.
Penalty: 10 penalty units.
Material available online
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person publishes National Library material; and
(b) the material is available online; and
(c) the person is requested under section 195CC to cause a copy 
of the material to be delivered under section 195CD; and
(d) the person contravenes section 195CD.
Penalty: 10 penalty units.
  
National Library of Australia  Division 3
Offences of strict liability
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) are offences of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
Not continuing offences
(4) Subsection 4K(2) of the Crimes Act 1914 (about continuing 
offences) does not apply in relation to an offence against 
subsection (1) or (2).
195CC  Library may request a copy of material available online
(1) The Director-General of the National Library may request, in 
writing, a person to cause a copy of National Library material to be 
delivered under section 195CD if:
(a) the person publishes the material; and
(b) the material is available online; and
(c) the Director-General considers that a copy of the material 
should be included in the national collection of library 
material (see section 6 of the National Library Act 1960).
Note: The national collection includes a comprehensive collection of library 
material relating to Australia and the Australian people.
(2) The request may be made any time after the person publishes the 
material.
(3) For the purposes of paragraph 9(2)(d) of the Electronic 
Transactions Act 1999, one way of consenting to a request being 
made by way of electronic communication is having the ability to 
automatically receive user agent requests.
Example: The Director-General could use a web harvester to make requests in 
the form of user agent requests.
195CD  Delivering material to the Library
(1) A person contravenes this section unless the person causes to be 
delivered to the National Library, before the end of the delivery 
  
Division 3  National Library of Australia
period for the National Library material, a copy of the material 
that:
(a) is a copy of the whole of the material (including any 
illustrations, drawings, engravings, photographs and 
audio-visual elements); and
(b) if the copy was requested under section 195CC—is in the 
electronic form in which the material was available online; 
and
(c) if the copy is in an electronic form:
(i) is free from any technological protection measure; and
(ii) is accompanied by any software or additional 
information necessary for the National Library to access 
the material from the copy; and
(d) if the copy is in hardcopy form:
(i) is finished and coloured, and bound, sewed, stitched or 
otherwise fastened together, in the same manner as the 
best copies of the material are supplied to the public; 
and
(ii) is on the best paper on which the material is printed; and
(e) is delivered at the person’s own expense, unless the copy was 
requested under section 195CC and the request stated 
otherwise; and
(f) meets the requirements (if any) prescribed by the National 
Library Minister for the purposes of this paragraph.
(2) The delivery period, for National Library material, starts on:
(a) for material published in a way covered by 
paragraph 195CB(1)(a)—the day it was so published; or
(b) for material requested under section 195CC—the day the 
request was made;
and ends 1 month later or on a later day allowed by the 
Director-General of the National Library.
Note: This section could apply twice, with separate delivery periods, if 
material published in Australia but not available online later became 
available online and was requested under section 195CC more than 1 
month after it was published.
  
National Library of Australia  Division 3
195CE  Meaning of National Library material
A literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or an edition of such 
a work, (whether in an electronic form or otherwise) is National 
Library material if:
(a) the work or edition is:
(i) a website, web page, web file, book, periodical, 
newspaper, pamphlet, sheet of music, map, plan, chart 
or table; or
(ii) prescribed by the National Library Minister for the 
purposes of this subparagraph; and
(b) copyright subsists in the work or edition under this Act; and
(c) the work or edition is not primarily audio-visual; and
(d) in the case of an edition:
(i) the edition contains additions or alterations in the text or 
other reading matter, illustrations, drawings, engravings, 
photographs or audio-visual elements; and
(ii) the content of at least one of those additions or 
alterations was not contained in any earlier edition; and
(e) the work or edition is not prescribed by the National Library 
Minister for the purposes of this paragraph.
Note: The same work in hardcopy form and an electronic form is the same 
National Library material.
195CF  Meaning of available online
National Library material is available online if it is communicated:
(a) on the internet; or
(b) in an electronic form prescribed by the National Library 
Minister for the purposes of this paragraph.
195CG  Infringement notices
(1) The National Library Minister may prescribe a scheme enabling a 
person who is alleged to have committed an offence against 
subsection 195CB(1) or (2) to pay a penalty to the Commonwealth 
as an alternative to prosecution.
  
Division 3  National Library of Australia
(2) The penalty must equal one-fifth of the maximum fine that a court 
could impose on the person as a penalty for that offence.
195CH  Relationship with State and Territory laws
This Division is not intended to exclude or limit the operation of 
any law of a State or Territory (whether made before or after the 
commencement of this Division) that makes provision for or in 
relation to the delivery to a specified public or other library in or of 
the State or Territory of copies of National Library material 
published in the State or Territory.
195CI  Delegation
(1) The Director-General of the National Library may, in writing, 
delegate the Director-General’s powers under this Division to a 
member of the staff of the National Library who is an SES 
employee or acting SES employee.
Note: The relevant powers are in section 195CC (about requesting copies of 
material available online), and subsection 195CD(2) (about allowing 
further time for delivery).
(2) In exercising powers under a delegation, the delegate must comply 
with any written directions of the Director-General.
195CJ  Legislative instruments
The National Library Minister may, by legislative instrument, 
prescribe matters required or permitted by this Division to be 
prescribed by that Minister.
  
Other matters  Division 4
Division 4—Other matters
196  Assignments and licences in respect of copyright
(1) Copyright is personal property and, subject to this section, is 
transmissible by assignment, by will and by devolution by 
operation of law.
(2) An assignment of copyright may be limited in any way, including 
any one or more of the following ways:
(a) so as to apply to one or more of the classes of acts that, by 
virtue of this Act, the owner of the copyright has the 
exclusive right to do (including a class of acts that is not 
separately specified in this Act as being comprised in the 
copyright but falls within a class of acts that is so specified);
(b) so as to apply to a place in or part of Australia;
(c) so as to apply to part of the period for which the copyright is 
to subsist.
(3) An assignment of copyright (whether total or partial) does not have 
effect unless it is in writing signed by or on behalf of the assignor.
(4) A licence granted in respect of a copyright by the owner of the 
copyright binds every successor in title to the interest in the 
copyright of the grantor of the licence to the same extent as the 
licence was binding on the grantor.
197  Prospective ownership of copyright
(1) Where, by an agreement made in relation to a future copyright and 
signed by or on behalf of the person who would, apart from this 
section, be the owner of the copyright on its coming into existence, 
that person purports to assign the future copyright (wholly or 
partially) to another person (in this subsection referred to as the 
assignee), then if, on the coming into existence of the copyright, 
the assignee or a person claiming under him or her would, apart 
from this subsection, be entitled as against all other persons to have 
  
Division 4  Other matters
the copyright vested in him or her (wholly or partially, as the case 
may be), the copyright, on its coming into existence, vests in the 
assignee or his or her successor in title by force of this subsection.
(2) Where, at the time when a copyright comes into existence, the 
person who, if he or she were then living, would be entitled to the 
copyright is dead, the copyright devolves as if it had subsisted 
immediately before his or her death and he or she had then been 
the owner of the copyright.
(3) A licence granted in respect of a future copyright by the 
prospective owner of the copyright binds every successor in title to 
the prospective interest in the copyright of the grantor of the 
licence to the same extent as the licence was binding on the 
grantor.
198  Copyright to pass under will with unpublished work
Where under a bequest, whether specific or general, a person is 
entitled, beneficially or otherwise, to the manuscript of a literary, 
dramatic or musical work, or to an artistic work, and the work was 
not published before the death of the testator, the bequest shall, 
unless a contrary intention appears in the testator’s will, be read as 
including the copyright in the work in so far as the testator was the 
owner of the copyright immediately before his or her death.
199  Reception of broadcasts
(1) Where the inclusion in a television broadcast or sound broadcast of 
a reading or recitation of an extract from a published literary or 
dramatic work, or from an adaptation of such a work, does not 
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work, a person 
who, by the reception of the broadcast, causes the work or 
adaptation to be performed in public does not, by doing so, infringe 
the copyright in the work.
(2) A person who, by the reception of a television broadcast or sound 
broadcast, causes a sound recording to be heard in public does not, 
  
Other matters  Division 4
by doing so, infringe the copyright, if any, in that recording under 
Part IV.
(3) A person who, by the reception of an authorized television 
broadcast, causes a cinematograph film to be seen or heard in 
public shall be treated, in any proceedings for infringement of the 
copyright, if any, in the film under Part IV, as if the person had 
been the holder of a licence granted by the owner of that copyright 
to cause the film to be seen or heard in public by the reception of 
the broadcast.
(5) If, in the circumstances mentioned in subsection (3), the person 
causing the cinematograph film to be seen or heard infringed the 
copyright in the film by reason that the broadcast was not an 
authorized broadcast, proceedings shall not be brought against that 
person under this Act in respect of his or her infringement of that 
copyright but the infringement shall be taken into account in 
assessing damages in any proceedings against the maker of the 
broadcast in respect of that copyright, in so far as that copyright 
was infringed by the making of the broadcast.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a broadcast, in relation to a 
cinematograph film, is an authorised broadcast only if it is made 
by, or with the licence of, the owner of the copyright in the film.
(7) A reference in this section to a broadcast must be read as a 
reference to a broadcast made by the Australian Broadcasting 
Corporation, by the Special Broadcasting Service Corporation, by 
the holder of a licence allocated by the Australian Communications 
and Media Authority under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992, or 
by a person authorised to make the broadcast by a class licence 
determined by that Authority under that Act.
200  Use of works and broadcasts for educational purposes
(1) A teacher or student does not infringe copyright in a work by 
copying the whole or a part of the work if:
(a) the copying occurs in the course of educational instruction; 
and
  
Division 4  Other matters
(b) the copying is not done using:
(i) a device adapted for the production of multiple copies; 
or
(ii) a device capable of producing a copy or copies by a 
process of reprographic reproduction.
(1A) Copying or communicating the whole or a part of copyright 
material does not infringe copyright in the material, if the material 
is copied or communicated:
(a) as part of the questions to be answered in an examination; or
(b) in an answer to such a question.
(1B) In subsections (1) and (1A):
(a) a reference to copying a work or copyright material includes 
a reference to making or copying an adaptation of the work 
or material; and
(b) a reference to communicating copyright material includes a 
reference to communicating an adaptation of the material.
(2) The making of a record of a sound broadcast, being a broadcast 
that was intended to be used for educational purposes, does not 
constitute an infringement of copyright in a work or sound 
recording included in the broadcast if:
(a) the record is made by, or on behalf of, the person or authority 
in charge of a place of education that is not conducted for 
profit; and
(b) the record is not used except in the course of instruction at 
that place.
(2A) The making of a record of a sound broadcast is not an infringement 
of copyright in the broadcast if the record is made by, or on behalf 
of, the body administering an educational institution and is not 
used except for the educational purposes of that institution or 
another educational institution.
(3) For the purposes of sections 38 and 103, in determining whether 
the making of an article constituted an infringement of copyright, 
subsections (1), (1A), (2) and (2A) shall be disregarded.
  
Other matters  Division 4
(4) For the purposes of any provision of this Act relating to imported 
articles, in determining whether the making of an article made 
outside Australia would, if the article had been made in Australia 
by the importer of the article, have constituted an infringement of 
copyright, subsections (1), (1A), (2) and (2A) shall be disregarded.
200AAA  Proxy web caching by educational institutions
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a computer system is operated by or on behalf of a body 
administering an educational institution; and
(b) the system is operated primarily to enable staff and students 
of the institution to use the system to gain online access for 
educational purposes to works and other subject-matter 
(whether they are made available online using the internet or 
merely the system); and
(c) the system automatically makes:
(i) temporary electronic reproductions of works made 
available online through the system to users of the 
system in response to action by the users; and
(ii) temporary electronic copies of other subject-matter 
made available online through the system to users of the 
system in response to action by the users; and
(d) those reproductions and copies are made by the system 
merely to facilitate efficient later access to the works and 
other subject-matter by users of the system.
(2) Copyright in a work or other subject-matter reproduced or copied 
by the system as described in paragraphs (1)(c) and (d) is not 
infringed by:
(a) that reproduction or copying; or
(b) the later communication of the work or other subject-matter, 
using that reproduction or copy, to a user of the system.
(3) This section does not limit section 28, 43A, 43B, 111A or 111B.
(4) Disregard this section in determining whether copyright in a work 
or other subject-matter is infringed by an act that:
  
Division 4  Other matters
(a) involves a system like one described in subsection (1) except 
that the system is not operated as described in 
paragraphs (1)(a) and (b); and
(b) corresponds to an act described in paragraph (2)(a) or (b).
(5) In this section:
system includes network.
200AB  Use of works and other subject-matter for certain purposes
(1) The copyright in a work or other subject-matter is not infringed by 
a use of the work or other subject-matter if all the following 
conditions exist:
(a) the circumstances of the use (including those described in 
paragraphs (b), (c) and (d)) amount to a special case;
(b) the use is covered by subsection (2) or (3);
(c) the use does not conflict with a normal exploitation of the 
work or other subject-matter;
(d) the use does not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate 
interests of the owner of the copyright.
Use by body administering library or archives
(2) This subsection covers a use that:
(a) is made by or on behalf of the body administering a library or 
archives; and
(b) is made for the purpose of maintaining or operating the 
library or archives (including operating the library or 
archives to provide services of a kind usually provided by a 
library or archives); and
(c) is not made partly for the purpose of the body obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit.
Use by body administering educational institution
(3) This subsection covers a use that:
  
Other matters  Division 4
(a) is made by or on behalf of a body administering an 
educational institution; and
(b) is made for the purpose of giving educational instruction; and
(c) is not made partly for the purpose of the body obtaining a 
commercial advantage or profit.
This section does not apply if under another provision the use does 
not, or might not, infringe copyright
(6) Subsection (1) does not apply if, because of another provision of 
this Act:
(a) the use is not an infringement of copyright; or
(b) the use would not be an infringement of copyright assuming 
the conditions or requirements of that other provision were 
met.
Example: Paragraph (a)—Without using a device adapted for producing multiple 
copies or a device that can produce copies by reprographic 
reproduction, a school teacher copies a literary work in the course of 
educational instruction. Under subsection 200(1), the copying is not 
an infringement of copyright in the work, so this section does not 
apply.
(6AA) In working out, for the purposes of subsection 113Q(2) (about the 
meaning of licensed copying or communication), whether copying 
or communicating does not infringe copyright only because of 
section 113P, disregard this section.
Cost recovery not commercial advantage or profit
(6A) The use does not fail to meet the condition in paragraph (2)(c) or 
(3)(c) merely because of the charging of a fee that:
(a) is connected with the use; and
(b) does not exceed the costs of the use to the charger of the fee.
Definitions
(7) In this section:
  
Division 4  Other matters
conflict with a normal exploitation has the same meaning as in 
Article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement.
special case has the same meaning as in Article 13 of the TRIPS 
Agreement.
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests has the same 
meaning as in Article 13 of the TRIPS Agreement.
use includes any act that would infringe copyright apart from this 
section.
202  Groundless threats of legal proceedings in relation to copyright 
infringement
(1) Where a person, by means of circulars, advertisements or 
otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding in 
respect of an infringement of copyright, then, whether the person 
making the threats is or is not the owner of the copyright or an 
exclusive licensee, a person aggrieved may bring an action against 
the first-mentioned person and may obtain a declaration to the 
effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against 
the continuance of the threats, and may recover such damages (if 
any) as he or she has sustained, unless the first-mentioned person 
satisfies the court that the acts in respect of which the action or 
proceeding was threatened constituted, or, if done, would 
constitute, an infringement of copyright.
(2) The mere notification of the existence of a copyright does not 
constitute a threat of an action or proceeding within the meaning of 
this section.
(3) Nothing in this section renders a barrister or solicitor of the High 
Court, or of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory, liable to an 
action under this section in respect of an act done by him or her in 
his or her professional capacity on behalf of a client.
(4) The defendant in an action under this section may apply, by way of 
counterclaim, for relief to which he or she would be entitled in a 
separate action in respect of an infringement by the plaintiff of the 
  
Other matters  Division 4
copyright to which the threats relate and, in any such case, the 
provisions of this Act with respect to an action for infringement of 
a copyright are, mutatis mutandis, applicable in relation to the 
action.
(5) A reference in this section to an action in respect of an 
infringement of copyright shall be read as including a reference to 
an action in respect of the conversion or detention of an infringing 
copy or of a device used or intended to be used for making 
infringing copies.
202A  Groundless threats of legal proceedings in relation to 
technological protection measures
(1) If a person (the first person) threatens another person with an 
action under Subdivision A of Division 2A of Part V, a person 
aggrieved may bring an action against the first person.
Note: Subdivision A of Division 2A of Part V establishes causes of action 
that relate to circumventing an access control technological protection 
measure (section 116AN), manufacturing etc. a circumvention device 
for a technological protection measure (section 116AO) and providing 
etc. a circumvention service for a technological protection measure 
(section 116AP).
(2) An action may be brought under this section whether or not the 
first person is the owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright in 
the work or other subject-matter to which the threatened action 
relates.
(3) The mere notification that a work or other subject-matter is 
protected by a technological protection measure does not constitute 
a threat of an action within the meaning of this section.
(4) In an action under this section, the orders a court may make 
include the following:
(a) an order declaring that the threat is unjustifiable;
(b) an order granting an injunction restraining the first person 
from continuing to make the threat;
  
Division 4  Other matters
(c) an order awarding such damages (if any) for loss that the 
person aggrieved has suffered as a result of the making of the 
threat.
(5) The court must not make an order under subsection (4) if the first 
person satisfies the court that an action under Subdivision A of 
Division 2A of Part V has reasonable prospects of success.
(6) Nothing in this section renders a barrister or solicitor of the High 
Court, or of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory, liable to an 
action under this section in respect of an act done in his or her 
professional capacity on behalf of a client.
(7) If an action under this section is brought:
(a) the first person may apply, by way of counterclaim, for relief 
to which he or she would be entitled in an action under 
Subdivision A of Division 2A of Part V; and
(b) the provisions of Part V apply as if the counterclaim were an 
action brought by the first person under that Subdivision.
203  Limitation on power of courts to grant relief in proceedings 
under this Act
Nothing in this Act authorizes a State court or a court of a Territory 
to grant relief by way of injunction or account of profits if that 
court would not, apart from this Act, have power to grant such 
relief.
203A  Offence—failing to keep declarations relating to copying in 
library or archives
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) at a time, the person is:
(i) ultimately responsible for administering a library or 
archives; or
(ii) the officer in charge of a library or archives; and
(b) that time is:
  
Other matters  Division 4
(i) after an authorized officer of a library or archives 
reproduced or copied all or part of a work or other 
subject-matter under section 49 or 50; and
(ii) after a written declaration was made for the purpose of 
that section in relation to the reproduction or copying; 
and
(iii) before the end of the period prescribed by the 
regulations for the keeping of the declaration; and
(c) at that time, the declaration is not kept in the records of the 
library or archives.
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a) the person is the officer in charge of a library or archives and 
proves that:
(i) the reproduction or copying took place before the day 
the person became the officer in charge; and
(ii) on that day the declaration was not in the possession of 
the person administering the library or archives; or
(b) the person proves that the person took all reasonable 
precautions, and exercised due diligence, to ensure the 
declaration was kept in the records of the library or archives.
Note: The person bears a legal burden in relation to a matter in 
subsection (2) (see section 13.4 of the Criminal Code).
(3) Subsection (1) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
(4) The person cannot be convicted of more than one offence under 
this section in relation to the one declaration.
Note: Section 203G makes early destruction or disposal of the declaration an 
offence.
  
Division 4  Other matters
203E  Inspection of records and declarations retained in records of 
libraries and archives
(1) The owner of the copyright in a work, sound recording or 
cinematograph film, or the agent of such an owner, may notify the 
officer in charge of a library or archives, in writing, that he or she 
wishes to inspect, on a day specified in the notice:
(a) all the relevant declarations retained in the records of the 
library or archives that relate to the making, in reliance on 
section 49 or 50, of copies of works or parts of works or of 
copies of other subject-matter; or
(b) such of those declarations as:
(i) relate to the making, in reliance on section 49 or 50, of 
copies of works or parts of works or of copies of other 
subject-matter; and
(ii) were made during a period specified in the notice.
(2) The day specified in the notice must be an ordinary working day of 
the library or archives that is at least 7 days after the notice is 
given.
(4) Where a person gives notice, under subsection (1), to the officer in 
charge of a library or archives that he or she wishes to inspect 
certain declarations on a particular day, that person may, during the 
ordinary working hours of the library or archives, on that day, but 
not earlier than 10 a.m. or later than 3 p.m., inspect the declarations 
to which the notice relates and, where the notice relates also to the 
inspection of the collection of the library or archives, may also 
during those hours on that day inspect that collection, and, for that 
purpose, may enter the premises of the library or archives.
(6) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person is:
(i) ultimately responsible for administering a library or 
archives; or
(ii) the officer in charge of a library or archives; and
  
Other matters  Division 4
(b) another person (the inspector) attends at the premises of the 
library or archives for the purpose of exercising his or her 
powers under subsection (4); and
(c) the inspector is not provided with all reasonable facilities and 
assistance for the effective exercise of those powers.
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
(6A) Subsection (6) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
(8) The officer in charge of a library or archives shall not be convicted 
of an offence against subsection (6) if the officer adduces evidence 
that he or she believed, on reasonable grounds, that the person who 
attended the premises of the library or archives, as the case may be, 
as mentioned in that subsection, was provided with all reasonable 
facilities and assistance for the effective exercise of the powers 
conferred by subsection (4) and that evidence is not rebutted by the 
prosecution.
(9) The body administering a library or archives shall not be convicted 
of an offence against subsection (6) if the body adduces evidence 
that it took all reasonable precautions, and exercised due diligence, 
to ensure that the person who attended the premises of the library 
or archives, as the case may be, as mentioned in that subsection, 
was provided with all reasonable facilities and assistance for the 
effective exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (4) and 
that evidence is not rebutted by the prosecution.
(10) A person (the defendant) commits an offence if:
(a) the defendant makes a record of information, or divulges or 
communicates information; and
(b) the information was acquired by the defendant either in the 
course of an inspection the defendant made under 
subsection (4) or because it was divulged or communicated 
to the defendant either:
(i) by another person who acquired the information in the 
course of an inspection he or she made under 
subsection (4); or
  
Division 4  Other matters
(ii) in one of a series of divulgements or communications 
by different persons that started with a divulgement or 
communication of the information by a person who 
acquired it the course of an inspection he or she made 
under subsection (4).
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
(10A) Subsection (10) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
(11) Subsection (10) does not apply if the defendant makes the record, 
divulgement or communication with the intention of:
(a) informing the owner of the copyright in a work or other 
subject-matter that a copy has been made of the work or other 
subject-matter; or
(b) enforcing a right that a person has under this Act in 
connection with a work or other subject-matter in which 
copyright subsists; or
(c) ensuring compliance with a provision of Division 5 of 
Part III or with a provision of this Part.
Note: The defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (11) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
203F  False and misleading declarations
A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a declaration for the purposes of section 49 
or 50; and
(b) the declaration is false or misleading in a material particular.
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
203G  Offence—disposing of or destroying certain declarations
A person commits an offence if:
  
Other matters  Division 4
(a) the person disposes of, destroys, or causes the disposal or 
destruction of, a declaration made for the purposes of 
section 49 or 50; and
(b) the period prescribed by the regulations for the keeping of the 
declaration has not ended.
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
203H  Notation of certain copies etc.
(1) In proceedings against a person or body for infringement of 
copyright in a work in connection with the making, by or on behalf 
of an institution, of a reproduction of the work, or of a part of the 
work, the person or body is not entitled to rely on section 49 or 50 
as justification for the making of the reproduction unless, at or 
about the time the reproduction was made, there was made on the 
reproduction a notation stating that the reproduction was made on 
behalf of that institution and specifying the date on which the 
reproduction was made.
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a notation described in subsection (1) on a 
reproduction of a work or part of a work; and
(b) a statement in the notation is false or misleading in a material 
particular.
Penalty: 5 penalty units.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (1):
(a) if a reproduction of the whole or part of a work, or a copy of 
a sound recording or a cinematograph film:
(i) is made, or caused to be made, by an authorized officer 
of a library; or
(ii) is made by, or on behalf of, the officer in charge of a 
library;
being a library of an institution, the reproduction or copy is 
taken to have been made on behalf of the institution; and
  
Division 4  Other matters
(b) if a reproduction of the whole or part of a work, or a copy of 
a sound recording or a cinematograph film:
(i) is made, or caused to be made, by an authorized officer 
of a library; or
(ii) is made by, or on behalf of, the officer in charge of a 
library;
being a library that is not a library of an institution:
(iii) the reproduction or copy is taken to have been made on 
behalf of the person or body administering the library; 
and
(iv) that subsection applies as if references to an institution 
were references to that person or body; and
(c) if a reproduction of the whole or part of a work, or a copy of 
a sound recording or a cinematograph film:
(i) is made, or caused to be made, by an authorized officer 
of archives; or
(ii) is made by, or on behalf of, the officer in charge of 
archives;
then:
(iii) the reproduction or copy is taken to have been made by 
or on behalf of the person or body administering the 
archives; and
(iv) that subsection applies as if references to an institution 
were references to that person or body; and
(d) if a reproduction, or a record embodying a sound recording, 
of the whole or part of a work is made by or on behalf of the 
body administering an institution, the reproduction or record 
is taken to have been made on behalf of the institution; and
(e) if a copy of a sound recording or a cinematograph film is 
made by or on behalf of the body administering an 
institution, the copy is taken to have been made on behalf of 
the institution.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
Part XI—Transitional
Division 1—Preliminary
204  Interpretation
(1) In this Part, the expression photograph has, in lieu of the meaning 
given to that expression by section 10, the meaning given by the 
next succeeding subsection.
(2) For the purposes of any provision of this Part that provides that an 
expression is to have the meaning given to that expression by this 
section or that refers to an expression as defined by this section:
collective work means:
(a) an encyclopaedia, dictionary, year book or similar work;
(b) a newspaper, review, magazine or similar periodical; or
(c) a work written in distinct parts by different authors, or in 
which works or parts of works of different authors are 
incorporated.
deliver, in relation to a lecture, includes deliver by means of a 
mechanical instrument.
dramatic work includes a piece for recitation, a choreographic 
work or entertainment in dumb show the scenic arrangement or 
acting form of which is fixed in writing or otherwise, and a 
cinematograph production where the arrangement, the acting form 
or the combination of incidents represented gives the work an 
original character.
lecture includes an address, speech and sermon.
literary work includes a map, chart, plan, table and compilation.
perform, in relation to a dramatic work as defined by this section 
or a musical work, means make an acoustic representation of the 
work or a visual representation of a dramatic action in the work, 
  
Division 1  Preliminary
and includes make such a representation by means of a mechanical 
instrument.
photograph includes photo-lithograph and a work produced by a 
process similar to photography.
205  References to making of works, recordings and films
For the purposes of any reference in this Part to works, sound 
recordings or cinematograph films made before the 
commencement of this Act, a work, sound recording or 
cinematograph film the making of which extended over a period 
shall be deemed not to have been made before the commencement 
of this Act unless the making of it was completed before the 
commencement of this Act.
206  References in other laws or instruments to copyright
(1) Without prejudice to the operation of the succeeding sections of 
this Part:
(a) a reference in any other law of the Commonwealth or in any 
contract, agreement or other instrument to a provision of the 
Copyright Act, 1911 shall be read as a reference, or as 
including a reference, to the corresponding provision of this 
Act;
(b) a reference in any other law of the Commonwealth or in any 
contract, agreement or other instrument to copyright or to 
works in which copyright subsists shall, if apart from this Act 
it would be read as a reference to copyright under the 
Copyright Act, 1911 or to works in which copyright 
subsisted under that Act, be read as a reference, or as 
including a reference, to copyright under this Act or to works 
or any other subject-matter in which copyright subsists under 
this Act, as the case may be; and
(c) a reference in any other law of the Commonwealth or in any 
contract, agreement or other instrument to the grant of an 
interest in copyright by licence shall be read, in relation to 
  
Preliminary  Division 1
copyright under this Act, as a reference to the grant of a 
licence in respect of that copyright.
(2) This section has effect unless the contrary intention appears in the 
other law of the Commonwealth or in the contract, agreement or 
other instrument, as the case may be.
(3) In this section, law of the Commonwealth means:
(a) an Act;
(b) an instrument (including regulations or rules) having effect 
by virtue of an Act;
(c) an Ordinance of a Territory and any other law in force in a 
Territory;
(d) an instrument (including regulations or rules) having effect 
by virtue of such an Ordinance or law; and
(e) an instrument having effect by virtue of any such regulations 
or rules as are mentioned in paragraph (b) or paragraph (d).
207  Application
Except in so far as this Part otherwise expressly provides, this Act 
applies in relation to things existing at the commencement of this 
Act in like manner as it applies in relation to things coming into 
existence after the commencement of this Act.
208  Authorship of photographs
(1) A reference in this Act to the author of a photograph shall, in 
relation to a photograph taken before the commencement of this 
Act, be read as a reference to the person who, at the time when the 
photograph was taken, was the owner of the material on which the 
photograph was taken.
(2) However, if the owner of the material on which the photograph 
was taken was a body corporate, then subsection (1) only applies in 
respect of references to the author of the photograph that relate to 
the ownership of the copyright in the photograph.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
Note: For example, subsection (1) does not apply in relation to references to 
the author of the photograph that relate to the duration of the copyright 
in the photograph.
209  Publication
(1) For the purposes of the application of subsection 29(5) in 
determining whether a publication that took place before the 
commencement of this Act was the first publication, the reference 
in that subsection to a period of not more than 30 days shall be read 
as a reference to a period of not more than 14 days.
(2) For the purposes of the application of subsection 29(7) in relation 
to an act done before the commencement of this Act:
(a) a reference in that subsection to copyright includes a 
reference to copyright under the Copyright Act 1905 and to 
copyright under the Copyright Act, 1911; and
(b) a reference in that subsection to the licence of the owner of 
copyright shall:
(i) in relation to copyright under the Copyright Act 1905—
be read as a reference to the privity of the owner; and
(ii) in relation to copyright under the Copyright Act, 
1911—be read as a reference to the consent or 
acquiescence of the owner.
  
Original works  Division 2
Division 2—Original works
210  Expired copyright not to revive
(1) Notwithstanding anything in Part III, copyright does not subsist by 
virtue of that Part in a work first published before the 
commencement of this Act unless copyright subsisted in the work 
under the Copyright Act, 1911 immediately before the 
commencement of this Act.
(2) The last preceding subsection does not apply in relation to a work 
to which Division 5 applies.
211  Original works in which copyright subsists
(1) Subsection 32(1) applies to works made before the commencement 
of this Act as if each reference in that subsection to a qualified 
person included a reference to a British subject and to a person 
domiciled in any part of the Sovereign’s dominions to which the 
Copyright Act, 1911 extended.
(2) Subsection 32(2) applies to works first published before the 
commencement of this Act as if paragraphs (d) and (e) of that 
subsection were omitted.
(3) Subsection 32(2) applies to works that are first published after the 
commencement of this Act and the author of which died before the 
commencement of the Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948 as if 
the reference in paragraph 32(2)(e) to a qualified person included a 
reference to a person who would have been an Australian citizen if 
that Act had been in force immediately before his or her death.
(4) Subsection 32(3) does not apply to or in relation to a building that 
was constructed before the commencement of this Act.
(5) This section has effect subject to the last preceding section.
  
Division 2  Original works
213  Ownership of copyright
(1) Subsections 35(4) and (6) do not apply in relation to works made 
before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Subsection 35(5) does not apply in relation to a work that was or is 
made in pursuance of an agreement made before the 
commencement of this Act.
(3) Where a work is excluded from the application of subsection 35(4), 
(5) or (6) by reason of either of the last two preceding subsections, 
subsection 35(2) has effect in relation to the work subject to the 
succeeding subsections of this section.
(4) The operation of any of the next three succeeding subsections in 
relation to a particular work may be excluded or modified by 
agreement.
(5) Where, in the case of a work being a photograph, portrait or 
engraving:
(a) a person made, for valuable consideration, an agreement with 
another person for the taking of the photograph, the painting 
or drawing of the portrait or the making of the engraving by 
the other person; and
(b) the work was made in pursuance of the agreement;
the first-mentioned person is the owner of any copyright subsisting 
in the work by virtue of Part III.
(6) Where the work was made by the author in pursuance of the terms 
of his or her employment by another person under a contract of 
service or apprenticeship, that other person is the owner of any 
copyright subsisting in the work by virtue of Part III.
(7) Where the work is a literary, dramatic or artistic work that was 
made by the author in pursuance of the terms of his or her 
employment by the proprietor of a newspaper, magazine or similar 
periodical under a contract of service or apprenticeship and was so 
made for the purpose of publication in a newspaper, magazine or 
similar periodical, the author is entitled to restrain the publication 
  
Original works  Division 2
of the work otherwise than in a newspaper, magazine or similar 
periodical.
(8) In the last three preceding subsections, expressions that are defined 
by section 204 have the meanings respectively given to those 
expressions by that section and do not have the meanings, if any, 
respectively given to those expressions by Part II.
214  Infringement by importation, sale and other dealings
For the purposes of sections 37 and 38, the fact that, to the 
knowledge of a person, the making of an article constituted, or, in 
the case of an imported article, would, if the article had been made 
in Australia by the importer of the article, have constituted, an 
infringement of copyright under the Copyright Act, 1911 has the 
like effect as if, to the knowledge of that person, the making of the 
article had constituted, or would, if the article had been made in 
Australia by the importer, have constituted, as the case may be, an 
infringement of copyright under this Act.
215  Recording of musical works
(1) Where a record of a work has, before the commencement of this 
Act, been made by, or with the consent or acquiescence of, the 
owner of the copyright in the work under the Copyright Act, 1911, 
Division 6 of Part III has the like effect as if the record had been 
made in Australia for the purpose of retail sale and had been so 
made by, or with the licence of, the person who is entitled, by 
virtue of this Act, to authorize the making in Australia of records 
of the work.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection 5(1) of this Act, subsections 19(2) to 
(7), inclusive, of the Copyright Act, 1911 as in force immediately 
before the commencement of this Act continue to apply in relation 
to records made before the commencement of this Act and, subject 
to those subsections, any regulations made for the purposes of 
those subsections and in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act continue to apply in relation to those 
records.
  
Division 2  Original works
216  Publication of artistic works
Section 68 does not apply in relation to a painting, drawing, 
engraving, photograph or cinematograph film made before the date 
of commencement of this Act, but the copyright in an artistic work 
is not infringed by the publication of a painting, drawing, 
engraving, photograph or cinematograph film made before that 
date if, by virtue of section 65 or section 66, the making of the 
painting, drawing, engraving, photograph or film would not have 
constituted an infringement of the copyright under this Act if this 
Act had been in operation at the time when it was made.
217  Reconstruction of buildings
The reference in subsection 73(2) to construction of a building by, 
or with the licence of, the owner of the copyright in architectural 
drawings or plans shall be read as including a reference to 
construction by, or with the licence of, the person who, at the time 
of the construction, was the owner of the copyright in the drawings 
or plans under the law relating to copyright that was in force at that 
time in the State or Territory in which the building was 
constructed.
218  Industrial designs
(1) Division 8 of Part III does not apply to artistic works made before 
the commencement of this Act.
(2) Copyright does not subsist by virtue of this Act in an artistic work 
made before the commencement of this Act which, at the time 
when the work was made, constituted a design capable of being 
registered under the Designs Act 1906, or under that Act as 
amended and in force at that time, and was used, or intended to be 
used, as a model or pattern to be multiplied by an industrial 
process.
  
Original works  Division 2
219  Reproduction of work upon payment of royalties
(1) The copyright in a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work that 
has been published before the commencement of this Act is not 
infringed by the reproduction of the work for sale if:
(a) the reproduction takes place at a time after the expiration of 
twenty-five years, or, in the case of a work in which 
copyright subsisted at the commencement of the Copyright 
Act, 1911, after the expiration of thirty years, after the date of 
the death of the author; and
(b) the person reproducing the work establishes:
(i) that, before the commencement of this Act, he or she 
gave the notice in writing of his or her intention to 
reproduce the work that was prescribed for the purposes 
of the proviso to section 3 of the Copyright Act, 1911; 
and
(ii) that he or she has paid, in the manner that was 
prescribed for the purposes of that proviso, or is 
prescribed for the purposes of this section, as the case 
may be, to, or for the benefit of, the owner of the 
copyright royalties in respect of all copies of the work 
sold by him or her calculated at the rate of ten per 
centum of the price at which he or she published the 
reproduction.
(2) The regulations may make provision for or in relation to the 
manner in which, and the times at which, payment of royalties is to 
be made for the purposes of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) of 
the last preceding subsection and may include provision requiring 
payment in advance, or otherwise securing the payment of the 
royalties.
(3) Regulations 38 to 42, inclusive, of the Copyright Regulations as in 
force under the Copyright Act 1912-1966 immediately before the 
commencement of this Act continue in force for the purposes of 
this section as if they had been made under this Act, but may be 
amended or repealed by regulations made under this Act.
  
Division 2  Original works
(4) A reference in paragraph (1)(a) to a time after the expiration of a 
specified number of years from the date of the death of the author 
of a work shall, in the case of a work of joint authorship, be read as 
a reference to a time after:
(a) the expiration of the same number of years from the date of 
the death of the author who died first; or
(b) the date of the death of the author who died last;
whichever is the later.
(5) Where a literary, dramatic or musical work, or an engraving, in 
which copyright subsisted at the date of the death of the author or, 
in the case of a work of joint authorship, at or immediately before 
the date of the death of the author who died last:
(a) had not been published;
(b) in the case of a dramatic or musical work—had not been 
performed in public; and
(c) in the case of a lecture—had not been delivered in public;
before that date, subsection (1) applies as if the author had died on 
the date on which:
(d) in the case of a literary work (other than a lecture) or an 
engraving—the work was first published;
(e) in the case of a dramatic or musical work—the work was first 
published or first performed in public, whichever first 
happened; or
(f) in the case of a lecture—the lecture was first published or 
first delivered in public, whichever first happened.
(6) In this section, expressions that are defined by section 204 have the 
meanings respectively given to those expressions by that section 
and do not have the meanings, if any, respectively given to those 
expressions by Part II.
  
Subject-matter other than works  Division 3
Division 3—Subject-matter other than works
220  Sound recordings
(1) Subsection 89(1) applies in relation to sound recordings made 
before the commencement of this Act as if the reference in that 
subsection to a qualified person included a reference to a British 
subject and to a person domiciled in any part of the Sovereign’s 
dominions to which the Copyright Act, 1911 extended.
(2) Subsection 89(2) does not apply in relation to a sound recording 
made before the commencement of this Act.
221  Cinematograph films
Copyright does not subsist by virtue of section 90 in a 
cinematograph film made before the commencement of this Act.
222  Application of Act to dramatic works and photographs 
comprised in cinematograph films
(1) Where a cinematograph film made before the commencement of 
this Act was an original dramatic work as defined by section 204, 
this Act (other than this subsection) has effect in relation to the 
film as if the film had been an original dramatic work as defined by 
section 10 and the person who was the author of the work for the 
purposes of the Copyright Act, 1911 shall be deemed to be the 
author of the work for the purposes of this Act as having effect by 
virtue of this subsection.
(2) This Act has effect in relation to photographs forming part of a 
cinematograph film made before the commencement of this Act in 
like manner as it has effect in relation to photographs not forming 
part of a cinematograph film.
  
Division 3  Subject-matter other than works
223  Television broadcasts and sound broadcasts
Copyright does not subsist by virtue of section 91 in:
(a) a television broadcast or a sound broadcast made before the 
commencement of this Act; or
(b) a television broadcast or a sound broadcast made after the 
commencement of this Act that is a repetition of a television 
broadcast or a sound broadcast made before the 
commencement of this Act.
224  Published editions of works
Copyright does not subsist by virtue of section 92 in a published 
edition of a work or works where the first publication of the edition 
took place before the commencement of this Act.
225  Infringement by importation, sale and other dealings
For the purposes of sections 102 and 103, the fact that, to the 
knowledge of a person, the making of an article constituted, or, in 
the case of an imported article, would, if the article had been made 
in Australia by the importer of the article, have constituted, an 
infringement of copyright under the Copyright Act, 1911 has the 
like effect as if, to the knowledge of that person, the making of the 
article had constituted, or would, if the article had been made in 
Australia by the importer, have constituted, as the case may be, an 
infringement of copyright under this Act.
  
Miscellaneous  Division 4
Division 4—Miscellaneous
226  Actions for infringement
Section 115 does not apply to an infringement of copyright under 
the Copyright Act, 1911 and does not affect any proceedings under 
that Act, whether instituted before or after the commencement of 
this Act.
227  Infringing copies
Section 116 of this Act does not apply in relation to an article 
made, or imported into Australia, before the commencement of this 
Act, but, notwithstanding subsection 5(1) of this Act, proceedings 
may, subject to the Copyright Act, 1911, be brought or continued 
by virtue of section 7 of that Act in relation to such an article and 
may be so brought or continued although the proceedings relate to 
the conversion or detention of the article after the commencement 
of this Act.
228  Actions where copyright subject to exclusive licence
Division 3 of Part V does not apply in relation to a licence granted 
before the commencement of this Act and does not affect any 
proceedings under the Copyright Act, 1911, whether instituted 
before or after the commencement of this Act.
229  Offences and summary proceedings
For the purposes of Division 5 of Part V, the definition of 
infringing copy in section 10 applies as if any reference in that 
definition to copyright included a reference to copyright under the 
Copyright Act, 1911.
  
Division 4  Miscellaneous
230  Limitation of actions
Section 134 of this Act does not apply in relation to an 
infringement of copyright under the Copyright Act, 1911 or to an 
article made, or imported into Australia, before the commencement 
of this Act.
231  Restriction of importation of printed copies of works
Where:
(a) before the date of commencement of this Act, a notice had 
been given in respect of a work under section 10 of the 
Copyright Act 1912 or of that Act as amended; and
(b) that notice had not been withdrawn, and had not otherwise 
ceased to have effect, before that date;
the notice has, during the period of six months commencing on that 
date, such effect (if any) as it would have if it had been duly given 
in accordance with section 135 of this Act.
232  References and applications to Tribunal in relation to licence 
schemes
(1) Part VI applies in relation to licence schemes formulated before the 
date of commencement of this Act in like manner as it applies in 
relation to licence schemes formulated on or after that date, but, for 
the purposes of the application of that Part in relation to licence 
schemes formulated before that date, any reference in that Part to 
copyright includes a reference to copyright under the Copyright 
Act, 1911.
(2) Any reference in section 157 to a refusal or failure to grant or 
procure the grant of a licence, or to a proposal that a licence should 
be granted, does not include a reference to a refusal or failure that 
occurred, or a proposal that was made, before the commencement 
of this Act.
  
Miscellaneous  Division 4
235  Crown copyright in films
(1) This section applies to a cinematograph film made before the 
commencement of this Act.
(2) Section 178 does not apply in relation to the film.
(3) Sections 176, 177 and 180 apply:
(a) in relation to the film in accordance with subsection 222(1) if 
the film was an original dramatic work (within the meaning 
of section 204); and
(b) in relation to photographs forming part of the film in the 
same way as those sections apply in relation to photographs 
not forming part of a cinematograph film.
236  Works made or published by international organizations
(1) Subsection 187(1) does not apply in relation to works made before 
the commencement of this Act.
(2) Subsection 187(2) does not apply in relation to works first 
published before the commencement of this Act.
237  Subject-matter, other than original works, made or published 
by international organizations
(1) Subsection 188(1) does not apply in relation to sound recordings or 
cinematograph films made before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Subsection 188(2) does not apply in relation to sound recordings or 
cinematograph films first published before the commencement of 
this Act.
(3) Subsection 188(3) does not apply in relation to an edition 
published before the commencement of this Act.
239  Assignments and licences
(1) Subject to this section, where copyright subsists in a work by virtue 
of this Act, any document that was made, or event that occurred, 
  
Division 4  Miscellaneous
before the commencement of this Act, being a document or event 
that had any operation affecting the ownership of, or creating, 
transferring or terminating an interest, right or licence in respect of, 
copyright in the work under the Copyright Act, 1911 or would 
have had such an operation if that Act had continued in force, has 
the like operation in relation to the copyright in the work under this 
Act.
(2) If the operation of a document to which the last preceding 
subsection applies was or would have been limited to a period 
specified in the document, the document does not have any 
operation in relation to the copyright under this Act, except in so 
far as that period extends after the commencement of this Act.
(3) For the purposes of the operation of a document in accordance with 
this section:
(a) expressions used in the document have the same respective 
meanings as they had immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, whether or not those expressions have different 
meanings for the purposes of this Act; and
(b) subsection 197(1) does not apply.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), where the 
author of a work that was made before the commencement of this 
Act was the first owner of the copyright in the work:
(a) any assignment of the copyright, or any grant of an interest in 
the copyright, made by the author (otherwise than by will) 
after the commencement of the Copyright Act, 1911 and 
before the commencement of this Act, being an assignment 
or grant that has effect in relation to copyright in the work 
under this Act by virtue of subsection (1), does not operate to 
vest in the assignee or grantee any rights with respect to the 
copyright in the work after the expiration of 25 years after the 
date of the death of the author;
(b) on the death of the author, the reversionary interest in the 
copyright expectant on the termination of that period 
devolves, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, on 
  
Miscellaneous  Division 4
his or her legal personal representative as part of his or her 
estate; and
(c) any agreement entered into by the author as to the disposition 
of that reversionary interest is of no force or effect;
but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to apply to the 
assignment of the copyright in a collective work or a licence to 
publish a work or a part of a work as part of a collective work.
(5) In the last preceding subsection, expressions that are defined by 
section 204 have the meanings respectively given to those 
expressions by that section and do not have the meanings, if any, 
respectively given to those expressions by Part II.
(6) The preceding subsections of this section apply in relation to 
copyright under this Act in a sound recording or in a 
cinematograph film in like manner as they apply in relation to 
copyright in a work but a reference in those subsections to the 
copyright under the Copyright Act, 1911 shall:
(a) in the application of those subsections in relation to a sound 
recording—be read as a reference to the copyright under that 
Act in records embodying the recording; and
(b) in the application of those subsections in relation to a 
cinematograph film—be read as a reference to any copyright 
under that Act in the film (in so far as it constituted a 
dramatic work for the purposes of that Act) or in photographs 
forming part of the film.
240  Bequests
(1) Section 198 does not apply in relation to a bequest contained in the 
will of a testator who died before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Where:
(a) an author has died before the commencement of this Act;
(b) a person has acquired, under the will of the author, the 
ownership of a manuscript of a work by the author; and
(c) the work:
(i) has not been published;
  
Division 4  Miscellaneous
(ii) in the case of a dramatic or musical work—has not been 
performed in public; and
(iii) in the case of a lecture—has not been delivered in 
public;
the ownership by that person of the manuscript is evidence that that 
person is the owner of the copyright in the work.
(3) In the last preceding subsection, expressions that are defined by 
section 204 have the meanings respectively given to those 
expressions by that section and do not have the meanings, if any, 
respectively given to those expressions by Part II.
242  Groundless threats of legal proceedings
Section 202 of this Act does not apply in relation to threats made 
after the commencement of this Act in respect of acts that took 
place before the commencement of this Act and, notwithstanding 
section 6 of this Act, section 41A of the Copyright Act 1912-1966 
continues to apply in relation to any such threats in like manner as 
it continues to apply in relation to threats made before the 
commencement of this Act.
  
Works made before 1 July, 1912  Division 5
Division 5—Works made before 1 July, 1912
243  Interpretation
In this Division, right conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911, in 
relation to a work, means a right that, by virtue of section 24 of the 
Copyright Act, 1911, was conferred in place of a right that 
subsisted immediately before the commencement of that Act.
244  Application
This Division applies to works made before 1 July 1912.
245  Rights conferred by Copyright Act, 1911
Notwithstanding anything in Division 2, section 32 of this Act does 
not apply to a work to which this Division applies unless a right 
conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911 subsisted in the work 
immediately before the commencement of this Act.
246  Performing rights
(1) Where the right conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911 in relation to 
a dramatic or musical work to which this Division applies did not 
include the sole right to perform the work in public, then, 
copyright, in so far as it subsists in the work by virtue of this Act, 
does not include the performing rights in relation to the work.
(2) Where the right conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911 in relation to 
a dramatic or musical work to which this Division applies 
consisted only of the sole right to perform the work in public, then, 
copyright, in so far as it subsists in the work by virtue of this Act, 
consists only of the performing rights in relation to the work.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the performing rights, in relation 
to a work, are:
(a) the exclusive right to perform the work, or an adaptation of 
the work, in public;
  
Division 5  Works made before 1 July, 1912
(b) the exclusive right to communicate the work or an adaptation 
of the work to the public.
247  Contributions to periodicals
Where:
(a) a work to which this Division applies (in this section referred 
to as the relevant work) consists of an essay, article or item 
forming part of, and first published in, a review, magazine or 
other periodical or work of a like nature; and
(b) immediately before the commencement of this Act, a right of 
publishing the relevant work in a separate form subsisted by 
virtue of the note to the First Schedule to the Copyright Act, 
1911;
copyright subsisting in the relevant work by virtue of this Act is 
subject to that right of publishing the relevant work in a separate 
form.
248  Assignments and licences
(1) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection 239(1) of this 
Act, where:
(a) the author of a work to which this Division applies had, 
before the commencement of the Copyright Act, 1911, made 
an assignment or grant of a kind referred to in paragraph (a) 
of the proviso to subsection 24(1) of that Act (in this section 
referred to as the proviso); and
(b) copyright subsists in the work by virtue of this Act;
the succeeding subsections of this section have effect.
(2) If, before the commencement of this Act, an event occurred or a 
notice was given, being an event or notice that, in accordance with 
paragraph (a) of the proviso, had any operation affecting the 
ownership of the right conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911 in 
relation to the work or creating, transferring or terminating an 
interest, right or licence in respect of that right, that event or notice 
has the like operation in relation to the copyright in the work under 
this Act.
  
Works made before 1 July, 1912  Division 5
(3) Any right that, at a time after the commencement of this Act, 
would, by virtue of paragraph (a) of the proviso, have been 
exercisable in relation to the work or in relation to the right 
conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911, if this Act had not been 
enacted, is exercisable in relation to the work or in relation to the 
copyright subsisting in the work under this Act, as the case may be.
(4) If, in accordance with paragraph (a) of the proviso, the right 
conferred by the Copyright Act, 1911 would have reverted to the 
author or his or her personal representatives on the date referred to 
in that paragraph, and that date occurs after the commencement of 
this Act, then on that date:
(a) the copyright in the work under this Act reverts to the author 
or his or her personal representatives, as the case may be; and
(b) any interest of any other person in that copyright that subsists 
on that date by virtue of any document made before the 
commencement of the Copyright Act, 1911 ceases.
  
Division 1  Preliminary
Part XIA—Performers’ protection
Division 1—Preliminary
248A  Interpretation
(1) In this Part:
20-year protection period of a performance means the period:
(a) beginning on the day when the performance was given; and
(b) ending at the end of 20 calendar years after the calendar year 
in which the performance was given.
50-year protection period of a performance means the period:
(a) beginning on the day when the performance was given; and
(b) ending at the end of 50 calendar years after the calendar year 
in which the performance was given.
action means a proceeding of a civil nature between parties and 
includes a counterclaim.
authorised, in relation to a recording of a performance, means 
made with the authority of the performer.
cinematograph film includes an article in which visual images are 
embodied and which is capable of being used to show those images 
as a moving picture, and a sound-track associated with those 
images.
direct, in relation to a sound recording or cinematograph film of a 
performance, means made directly from the live performance.
exempt recording means:
(a) an indirect cinematograph film of a performance, being a 
film made solely for the purpose of the private and domestic 
use of the person who made it; or
  
Preliminary  Division 1
(aaa) an indirect cinematograph film or sound recording of a 
performance, being a film or recording that:
(i) is made from a communication that is a broadcast of the 
performance; and
(ii) is made in domestic premises; and
(iii) is made solely for private and domestic use by watching 
or listening to the performance at a time more 
convenient than the time when the broadcast is made; or
(aa) an indirect sound recording of a performance, being a 
recording that is a fair dealing with the performance for the 
purpose of research or study; or
Note: See subsection (1A).
(b) an indirect cinematograph film of a performance, being a 
film made solely for the purpose of use in scientific research; 
or
(c) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance if the recording or film is made:
(i) by, or on behalf of, the body administering an 
educational institution; and
(ii) solely for the educational purposes of that or another 
educational institution; or
Note: See section 248B.
(d) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance if the recording or film is a fair dealing with 
the performance for the purpose of one or more persons with 
a disability having access to copyright material; or
(e) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance if the recording or film is made:
(i) by, or on behalf of, an organisation assisting persons 
with a disability; and
(ii) solely for the purpose of assisting one or more persons 
with a disability to access copyright material in a format 
that the person or persons require because of the 
disability (whether the access is provided by or on 
behalf of the organisation or by another body or 
person); or
  
Division 1  Preliminary
(ea) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance if the recording or film is made by an 
authorized officer of a library or archives to which 
Subdivision A of Division 3 of Part IVA applies solely for 
any of the following purposes:
(i) the purpose of preserving the collection comprising that 
or another library or archives to which that Subdivision 
applies;
(ii) the purpose of research carried out at that or another 
library or archives to which that Subdivision applies;
(iii) purposes directly related to the care of control of the 
collection comprising the library or archives; or
(eb) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance if the recording or film is made by an 
authorized officer of a key cultural institution solely for the 
purpose of preserving copyright material that:
(i) forms part of the collection comprising the key cultural 
institution; and
(ii) the authorized officer is satisfied is of historical or 
cultural significance to Australia; or
(f) a direct or indirect cinematograph film of a performance 
made:
(i) for the purpose of, or associated with, the reporting of 
news or current affairs; or
(ii) for the purpose of criticism or review; or
(fa) a direct or indirect sound recording of a performance, being a 
recording that is a fair dealing with the performance:
(i) for the purpose of criticism or review, whether of that 
performance or another performance; or
(ii) for the purpose of, or associated with, the reporting of 
news in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical; or
(iii) for the purpose of, or associated with, the reporting of 
news by means of a communication or in a 
cinematograph film; or
(g) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance made solely for the purpose of a judicial 
  
Preliminary  Division 1
proceeding or the giving of professional advice by a legal 
practitioner; or
(h) a direct sound recording or cinematograph film of a 
performance made by a broadcaster who has the authority of 
the performer to broadcast the performance, being a 
recording or film made solely for the purpose of making that 
broadcast; or
(j) a direct or indirect sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance made by a person who reasonably believes, 
due to a fraudulent or innocent misrepresentation made to the 
person, that the performer has authorised the making of the 
recording or film by the person; or
(ja) a copy of a sound recording if:
(i) paragraph (aa), (c), (d), (e), (ea), (eb), (fa), (g) or (j) 
applies to the sound recording; and
(ii) the copy is made solely for a purpose mentioned in any 
of those paragraphs (other than paragraph (j)); or
(k) a copy of a cinematograph film if:
(i) paragraph (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (ea), (eb), (f), (g) or (j) 
applies to the film; and
(ii) the copy is made solely for a purpose mentioned in any 
of those paragraphs (other than paragraph (j)); or
(m) a copy of a sound recording or cinematograph film referred 
to in paragraph (h), being a copy made solely for the purpose 
referred to in that paragraph; or
(n) a copy of a sound recording or cinematograph film of a 
performance if:
(i) paragraph (j) applies to the recording or film; and
(ii) the copy is made by a person who believes, due to a 
fraudulent or innocent representation made to the 
person, that the performer has authorised the making of 
the copy; or
(p) a copy of an authorised recording of a performance, other 
than a copy of an authorised sound recording where the copy 
was made for use in a sound-track but the making of the 
  
Division 1  Preliminary
sound recording was not authorised for the purpose of use in 
a sound-track.
indirect, in relation to a sound recording or cinematograph film of 
a performance, means made from a communication of the 
performance.
performance means:
(a) a performance (including an improvisation) of a dramatic 
work, or part of such a work, including such a performance 
given with the use of puppets; or
(b) a performance (including an improvisation) of a musical 
work or part of such a work; or
(c) the reading, recitation or delivery of a literary work, or part 
of such a work, or the recitation or delivery of an improvised 
literary work; or
(d) a performance of a dance; or
(e) a performance of a circus act or a variety act or any similar 
presentation or show; or
(f) a performance of an expression of folklore;
being a live performance:
(g) that is given in Australia, whether in the presence of an 
audience or otherwise; or
(h) that is given by one or more qualified persons (even if it is 
also given by one or more persons who are not qualified 
persons), whether in the presence of an audience or 
otherwise.
performer, in relation to a performance that is given outside 
Australia, does not include a person who is not a qualified person 
at the time of the performance.
protection period, in relation to a performance, has the meaning 
given by section 248CA.
qualified person means an Australian citizen or a person resident 
in Australia.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
recording means a sound recording or cinematograph film, other 
than an exempt recording.
sound recording includes an article in which sounds are embodied.
unauthorised, in relation to a recording of a performance, means 
made without the authority of the performer.
unauthorised use has the meaning given by section 248G.
(1A) For the purposes of paragraph (aa) of the definition of exempt 
recording, in determining whether a recording is a fair dealing 
with a performance for the purpose of research or study, regard 
must be had to the following matters:
(a) the purpose and character of the recording;
(b) the nature of the performance;
(c) the possibility of obtaining an authorised recording of the 
performance within a reasonable time at an ordinary 
commercial price;
(d) the effect of the recording upon the potential market for, or 
the value of, authorised recordings of the performance;
(e) if only part of the performance is recorded—the amount and 
substantiality of the part recorded when compared to the 
whole performance.
(2) The following shall be taken not to be performances for the 
purposes of this Part:
(a) a performance referred to in subsection 28(1);
(b) a reading, recital or delivery of any item of news and 
information;
(c) a performance of a sporting activity; or
(d) a participation in a performance as a member of an audience.
(3) In this Part:
(a) a reference to the doing of an act in relation to a performance 
includes a reference to the doing of that act in relation to a 
substantial part of the performance;
  
Division 1  Preliminary
(b) a reference to the doing of an act in relation to a performance, 
or a recording of a performance, with the authority of the 
performer is, in the case of 2 or more performers, a reference 
to the doing of the act where each of the performers has 
authorised the doing of the act;
(c) a reference to the doing of an act in relation to a performance, 
or a recording of a performance, without the authority of the 
performer is, in the case of 2 or more performers, a reference 
to the doing of the act where at least one of the performers 
has not authorised the doing of the act; and
(d) a reference to a sound-track is a reference to a sound-track 
associated with visual images forming part of a 
cinematograph film.
248B  Educational purposes
Without limiting the meaning of the expression educational 
purposes in paragraph (c) of the definition of exempt recording in 
subsection 248A(1), a cinematograph film of a performance shall 
be taken to have been made for the educational purposes of an 
educational institution if it is made:
(a) for use in connection with a particular course of instruction 
provided by the institution; or
(b) for inclusion in the collection of a library of the institution.
248C  Exempt recordings cease to be exempt recordings in certain 
circumstances
(1) If any copies of a sound recording or a cinematograph film of a 
performance, being a sound recording or film that is an exempt 
recording under paragraph (h) of the definition of exempt 
recording in subsection 248A(1), are not destroyed before the end 
of the period of 12 months beginning on the day on which any of 
those copies is first used for broadcasting the performance, the 
sound recording or film shall, at the end of that period, cease to be 
an exempt recording.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
(1A) A sound recording, or a copy of a sound recording, ceases to be an 
exempt recording if it:
(a) is an exempt recording because it was made for a purpose 
mentioned in paragraph (aaa), (aa), (c), (d), (e), (ea), (eb) or 
(fa) of the definition of exempt recording in 
subsection 248A(1); and
(b) is used for a purpose not mentioned in those paragraphs 
without the authority of the performer.
(2) A cinematograph film, or a copy of a cinematograph film, ceases to 
be an exempt recording if it:
(a) is an exempt recording because it was made for a purpose 
mentioned in paragraph (a), (aaa), (b), (c), (d), (e), (ea), (eb) 
or (f) of the definition of exempt recording in 
subsection 248A(1); and
(b) is used for a purpose not mentioned in those paragraphs 
without the authority of the performer.
248CA  Protection period
(1) Subject to subsection (3), the protection period of a performance is 
the period beginning on the day when the performance was given 
and ending at the end of the period of 20 calendar years after the 
calendar year in which the performance was given.
(3) For the purposes of the operation, in relation to a sound recording 
of a performance, of a provision of this Part listed in 
subsection (4), the protection period of a performance is the period 
beginning on the day when the performance was given and ending 
at the end of the period of 50 calendar years after the calendar year 
in which the performance was given.
(4) Subsection (3) applies to the following provisions of this Part:
(a) paragraphs 248G(1)(a), (2)(a), (2)(b) and (2)(d) to (g);
(b) section 248PA;
(c) section 248PB;
(d) section 248PE;
(e) section 248PF;
  
Division 1  Preliminary
(f) section 248PG;
(g) section 248PI;
(h) section 248PJ;
(i) section 248PK;
(j) section 248PL;
(k) section 248PM.
248D  Private and domestic use
For the purposes of this Part, a cinematograph film is taken not to 
have been made for the private and domestic use of the person who 
made it if it is made for the purpose of:
(a) selling it, letting it for hire, or by way of trade offering or 
exposing it for sale or hire; or
(b) distributing it, whether for the purpose of trade or otherwise; 
or
(c) by way of trade exhibiting it in public; or
(d) broadcasting the film; or
(e) causing the film to be seen or heard in public.
248F  Application
(1) This Part, except Subdivisions A, B and C of Division 3, applies to 
acts done on or after 1 October 1989 in relation to a performance 
given on or after that day.
Note 1: That day was the day this Part commenced.
Note 2: Sections 248P and 248QA apply Subdivisions A and B of Division 3 
to acts done at or after the time those Subdivisions commence as a 
result of Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Copyright Amendment Act 2006. 
Subdivision C of that Division is merely ancillary to those 
Subdivisions.
(2) Nothing in this Part affects any copyright subsisting in a work that 
is performed or in any sound recording, cinematograph film or 
broadcast of a performance, or any other right or obligation arising 
otherwise than under this Part.
  
Preliminary  Division 1
(3) In the application of this Part to a counterclaim, the reference in 
section 248J to the defendant shall be read as a reference to the 
plaintiff.
  
Division 2  Actions by performers
Division 2—Actions by performers
248G  What constitutes unauthorised use
(1) A person makes an unauthorised use of a performance if the 
person, at any time during the protection period of the performance 
and without the authority of the performer:
(a) makes a direct or indirect recording of the performance; or
(b) communicates the performance to the public, either directly 
from the live performance or from an unauthorised recording 
of it.
Note: An educational institution can copy and communicate a broadcast of a 
performance without the authority of the performer in some 
circumstances: see Division 4 of Part IVA.
(2) A person makes an unauthorised use of a performance if the 
person, at any time during the protection period of the performance 
and without the authority of the performer:
(a) makes a copy of a recording of the performance that the 
person knows, or ought reasonably to know, is an 
unauthorised recording;
(b) makes a copy of an exempt recording of the performance, 
being a copy that the person knows, or ought reasonably to 
know, is not itself an exempt recording;
(c) makes, for use in a sound-track, a copy of an authorised 
sound recording of the performance and the person knows, or 
ought reasonably to know, that the making of the sound 
recording was not authorised for the purpose of use in that or 
any other sound-track;
(d) has in his or her possession a recording of the performance, 
for the purpose of:
(i) selling it, letting it for hire, or by way of trade offering 
or exposing it for sale or hire; or
(ii) distributing it for the purpose of trade, or for any other 
purpose that will affect prejudicially the financial 
  
Actions by performers  Division 2
interests of the performer or performers in the 
performance;
being a recording that the person knows, or ought reasonably 
to know, is an unauthorised recording;
(e) sells, lets on hire, or by way of trade exhibits in public or 
offers or exposes for sale or hire, a recording of the 
performance that the person knows, or ought reasonably to 
know, is an unauthorised recording;
(f) distributes a recording of the performance for the purpose of 
trade, or for any other purpose to an extent that will affect 
prejudicially the financial interests of the performer or 
performers in the performance, being a recording that the 
person knows, or ought reasonably to know, is an 
unauthorised recording;
(g) imports a recording of the performance into Australia for the 
purpose of:
(i) selling it, letting it for hire, or by way of trade 
exhibiting it in public or offering or exposing it for sale 
or hire; or
(ii) distributing it for the purpose of trade, or for any other 
purpose to an extent that will affect prejudicially the 
financial interests of the performer or performers in the 
performance;
being a recording that the person knows, or ought reasonably 
to know, is an unauthorised recording; or
(h) causes a recording of the performance to be heard or seen in 
public, being a recording that the person knows, or ought 
reasonably to know, is an unauthorised recording.
(3) A person who communicates an authorised recording of a 
performance to the public without the authority of the performer 
does not, by so doing, make an unauthorised use of the 
performance.
(4) This section applies only to acts done in Australia.
  
Division 2  Actions by performers
248H  Copying sound recordings for broadcasting
(1) Despite paragraph 248G(2)(c), where the making of a copy of a 
sound recording of a performance for use in a sound-track would, 
but for this subsection, be an unauthorised use of the performance 
under that paragraph, the making by a person of such a copy solely 
for the purpose of use in a broadcast by that person is not an 
unauthorised use of the performance.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a copy if it is used for a purpose 
other than:
(a) a broadcast by the person who made the copy; or
(b) the making of further copies by that person for the purpose of 
broadcasting by that person.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to a copy unless all the copies made 
in accordance with that subsection are:
(a) destroyed; or
(b) transferred, with the consent of the Director-General of the 
National Archives of Australia, to the care (within the 
meaning of the Archives Act 1983) of the National Archives 
of Australia;
before the end of the period of 12 months beginning on the day on 
which any of those copies is first used for the purpose of a 
broadcast in accordance with that subsection, or before the end of 
such further period (if any) as is agreed between the maker of the 
copy and the performer, or all of the performers.
(4) The Director-General of the National Archives of Australia must 
not consent to the transfer of the care of a copy of a sound 
recording to the National Archives of Australia unless the 
Director-General has certified that the sound recording is of an 
exceptional documentary character.
248J  Actions for unauthorised use
(1) A performer may bring an action for an unauthorised use of his or 
her performance.
  
Actions by performers  Division 2
(2) The relief that a court may grant in an action for an unauthorised 
use of a performance includes an injunction (subject to such terms, 
if any, as the court thinks fit) and damages.
(3) Where, in an action for an unauthorised use of a performance:
(a) the unauthorised use is established; and
(b) the court is satisfied that it is proper to do so, having regard 
to:
(i) the flagrancy of the use;
(ii) any benefit shown to have accrued to the defendant by 
reason of the use; and
(iii) all other relevant matters;
the court may, in assessing damages, award such additional 
damages as it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
(4) If:
(a) a performer brings an action under this section that relates to 
a recording of a performance; and
(b) the relief granted in the action consists of or includes 
damages; and
(c) the performer has already been granted damages in an action 
under another section of this Act in relation to an 
infringement of his or her copyright in the recording; and
(d) the action referred to in paragraph (c) arose out of the same 
event or transaction as the action referred to in paragraph (a);
the amount of any damages referred to in paragraph (b) that, apart 
from this subsection, would be awarded to the performer is to be 
reduced by the amount of the damages referred to in paragraph (c).
(5) If:
(a) a performer brings an action under another section of this Act 
that relates to an infringement of his or her copyright in a 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the relief granted in the action consists of or includes 
damages; and
(c) the performer has already been granted damages in an action 
under this section in relation to the performance; and
  
Division 2  Actions by performers
(d) the action referred to in paragraph (c) arose out of the same 
event or transaction as the action referred to in paragraph (a);
the amount of any damages referred to in paragraph (b) that, apart 
from this subsection, would be awarded to the performer is to be 
reduced by the amount of the damages referred to in paragraph (c).
248K  Exercise of jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of a State or Territory in an 
action under section 248J shall be exercised by a single Judge of 
the Court.
248L  Appeals
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a decision of a court of a State or 
Territory (however constituted) in an action under section 248J is 
final and conclusive.
(2) An appeal lies from a decision of a court of a State or Territory in 
an action under section 248J:
(a) to the Federal Court of Australia; or
 (b) by special leave of the High Court, to the High Court.
248M  Jurisdiction of Federal Court
Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Court of Australia with 
respect to actions under section 248J.
248MA  Jurisdiction of Federal Circuit and Family Court of 
Australia (Division 2)
Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Circuit and Family Court of 
Australia (Division 2) with respect to actions under section 248J.
248N  Right to bring an action not assignable
The right of a performer to bring an action under section 248J is 
not assignable.
  
Offences  Division 3
Division 3—Offences
Subdivision A—General offences
248P  Scope of this Subdivision
(1) This Subdivision applies to acts done in Australia on or after the 
commencement of this Subdivision.
Note: This Subdivision commenced when it was included in this Act by 
Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Copyright Amendment Act 2006.
(2) This section has effect despite section 14.1 (Standard geographical 
jurisdiction) of the Criminal Code.
248PA  Unauthorised direct recording during protection period
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a direct recording of a performance; and
(b) the recording is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is made without the authority of the performer.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
  
Division 3  Offences
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a direct recording of a performance; and
(b) the recording is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is made without the authority of the performer 
and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
248PB  Unauthorised indirect recording during protection period
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an indirect recording of a performance; and
(b) the recording is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is made without the authority of the performer.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an indirect recording of a performance; and
  
Offences  Division 3
(b) the recording is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is made without the authority of the performer 
and the person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes an indirect recording of a performance; and
(b) the recording is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is made without the authority of the performer.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
Defence
(7) Subsection (1), (3) or (5) does not apply if the recording was made 
solely for the person’s private and domestic use.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (7) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
248PC  Unauthorised communication to public during 20-year 
protection period
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person communicates a performance to the public; and
(b) the communication is made during the 20-year protection 
period of the performance; and
  
Division 3  Offences
(c) the communication is made without the authority of the 
performer; and
(d) the communication is made either directly from the live 
performance or from an unauthorised recording of the 
performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person communicates a performance to the public; and
(b) the communication is made during the 20-year protection 
period of the performance; and
(c) the communication is made without the authority of the 
performer and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(d) the communication is made either directly from the live 
performance or from an unauthorised recording of the 
performance.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Defence
(7) To avoid doubt, subsections (1) and (3) do not apply to the 
communication to the public of an authorised recording of the 
performance.
Note 1: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matter in 
subsection (7) (see subsection 13.3(3) of the Criminal Code).
Note 2: An educational institution can also copy and communicate a broadcast 
of a performance without contravening this section in some 
circumstances (see Division 4 of Part IVA).
  
Offences  Division 3
248PD  Playing unauthorised recording publicly during 20-year 
protection period
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes a recording of a performance to be heard or 
seen in public; and
(b) the recording is heard or seen in public during the 20-year 
protection period of the performance; and
(c) the recording is unauthorised.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person causes a recording of a performance to be heard or 
seen in public; and
(b) the recording is heard or seen in public during the 20-year 
protection period of the performance; and
(c) the recording is unauthorised and the person is negligent as to 
that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
  
Division 3  Offences
248PE  Possessing equipment to make or copy unauthorised 
recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses a plate or recording equipment, 
intending it to be used for making:
(i) an unauthorised recording of a performance; or
(ii) a copy of an unauthorised recording of a performance; 
and
(b) the possession occurs during the protection period of the 
performance.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses a plate or recording equipment; and
(b) the plate or equipment is to be used for making:
(i) a recording of a performance; or
(ii) a copy of an unauthorised recording of a performance; 
and
(c) either:
(i) the recording to be made using the plate or equipment 
will be an unauthorised recording of the performance; or
  
Offences  Division 3
(ii) the recording to be copied using the plate or equipment 
is an unauthorised recording of the performance;
and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(d) the possession occurs during the protection period of the 
performance.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) To avoid doubt, recklessness is the fault element for the 
circumstance that the plate or equipment is to be used for making:
(a) a recording of a performance; or
(b) a copy of an unauthorised recording of a performance.
(5) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
No need to prove which performance or recording is to be involved
(8) In a prosecution for an offence against this section, it is not 
necessary to prove:
(a) which particular performance is intended to be, or will be, 
recorded using the device; or
(b) which particular recording is intended to be, or will be, 
copied using the device.
248PF  Copying unauthorised recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a recording of a performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
  
Division 3  Offences
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a recording of a performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a recording of a performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
  
Offences  Division 3
248PG  Unauthorised copying of exempt recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a recording of a performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the copy is made without the authority of the performer; and
(d) the recording is an exempt recording; and
(e) the copy is not an exempt recording.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a recording of a performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the copy is made without the authority of the performer and 
the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(d) the recording is an exempt recording; and
(e) the copy is not an exempt recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
  
Division 3  Offences
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a recording of a performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the copy is made without the authority of the performer; and
(d) the recording is an exempt recording; and
(e) the copy is not an exempt recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248PH  Unauthorised copying of authorised sound recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a sound recording of a 
performance, intending that the copy be used in a 
sound-track; and
(b) the copy is made during the 20-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the copy is made without the authority of the performer; and
(d) the sound recording is an authorised sound recording; and
(e) the making of the sound recording was not authorised for the 
purpose of use in that or any other sound-track.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
  
Offences  Division 3
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a sound recording of a 
performance, intending that the copy be used in a 
sound-track; and
(b) the copy is made during the 20-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the copy is made without the authority of the performer and 
the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(d) the sound recording is an authorised sound recording; and
(e) the making of the sound recording was not authorised for the 
purpose of use in that or any other sound-track and the 
person is negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a sound recording of a 
performance in preparation for use in a sound-track; and
(b) the copy is made during the 20-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the copy is made without the authority of the performer; and
(d) the sound recording is an authorised sound recording; and
(e) the making of the sound recording was not authorised for the 
purpose of use in that or any other sound-track.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
  
Division 3  Offences
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248PI  Selling etc. unauthorised recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts:
(i) sells a recording of a performance;
(ii) lets for hire a recording of a performance;
(iii) by way of trade offers or exposes for sale or hire a 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the act is done during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts:
(i) sells a recording of a performance;
(ii) lets for hire a recording of a performance;
(iii) by way of trade offers or exposes for sale or hire a 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the act is done during the protection period of the 
performance; and
  
Offences  Division 3
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts:
(i) sells a recording of a performance;
(ii) lets for hire a recording of a performance;
(iii) by way of trade offers or exposes for sale or hire a 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the act is done during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248PJ  Distributing unauthorised recording
Indictable offences
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a recording of a performance, with the 
intention of trading; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
  
Division 3  Offences
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a recording of a performance; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the distribution will affect prejudicially the financial interests 
of the performer in the performance; and
(d) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offences
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a recording of a performance, with the 
intention of trading; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a recording of a performance; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the distribution will affect prejudicially the financial interests 
of the performer in the performance; and
(d) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
  
Offences  Division 3
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(6) An offence against subsection (4) or (5) is a summary offence, 
despite section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a recording of a performance in 
preparation for, or in the course of, trade; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(9) Subsection (7) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248PK  Commercial possession or import of unauthorised recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses, or imports into Australia, a recording of 
a performance, with the intention of doing any of the 
following:
(i) selling the recording;
(ii) letting the recording for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing the recording for 
sale or hire;
(iv) distributing the recording either for the purpose of trade 
or to an extent that will affect prejudicially the financial 
interests of the performer in the performance; and
(b) the possession or import occurs during the protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
  
Division 3  Offences
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses, or imports into Australia, a recording of 
a performance, with the intention of doing any of the 
following:
(i) selling the recording;
(ii) letting the recording for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing the recording for 
sale or hire;
(iv) distributing the recording either for the purpose of trade 
or to an extent that will affect prejudicially the financial 
interests of the performer in the performance; and
(b) the possession or import occurs during the protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
  
Offences  Division 3
(a) the person possesses, or imports into Australia, a recording of 
a performance in preparation for, or in the course of, doing 
any of the following:
(i) selling the recording;
(ii) letting the recording for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing the recording for 
sale or hire;
(iv) distributing the recording for trade; and
(b) the possession or import occurs during the protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248PL  Exhibiting unauthorised recording in public by way of trade
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits in public a recording of a 
performance; and
(b) the exhibition occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
  
Division 3  Offences
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits in public a recording of a 
performance; and
(b) the exhibition occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits in public a recording of a 
performance; and
(b) the exhibition occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248PM  Importing unauthorised recording for exhibition by way of 
trade
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
  
Offences  Division 3
(a) the person imports into Australia a recording of a 
performance, with the intention of exhibiting the recording in 
public by way of trade; and
(b) the import occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Note: Under section 248CA, the protection period of a performance is:
(a) a 20-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
cinematograph film of the performance; and
(b) a 50-year protection period so far as this section relates to a 
sound recording of the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports into Australia a recording of a 
performance, with the intention of exhibiting the recording in 
public by way of trade; and
(b) the import occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
  
Division 3  Offences
(a) the person imports into Australia a recording of a 
performance, in preparation for exhibiting the recording in 
public by way of trade; and
(b) the import occurs during the protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
Subdivision B—Acts relating to sound recordings of 
performances given before 1 July 1995
248QA  Scope of this Subdivision
(1) This Subdivision applies to an act done in Australia on or after the 
commencement of this Subdivision, in relation to a performance 
given at any time before 1 July 1995.
Note 1: That day was the day on which Part 4 of the Copyright (World Trade 
Organization Amendments) Act 1994 commenced.
Note 2: This Subdivision commenced when it was included in this Act by 
Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Copyright Amendment Act 2006.
(2) This Subdivision has effect despite section 14.1 (Standard 
geographical jurisdiction) of the Criminal Code.
248QB  Possessing equipment for copying unauthorised sound 
recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses a plate or recording equipment, 
intending it to be used for making a copy of an unauthorised 
sound recording of a performance; and
  
Offences  Division 3
(b) the possession occurs during the 50-year protection period of 
the performance.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses a plate or recording equipment; and
(b) the plate or recording equipment is to be used for making a 
copy of a sound recording of a performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording of the 
performance and the person is negligent as to that fact; and
(d) the possession occurs during the 50-year protection period of 
the performance.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) To avoid doubt, recklessness is the fault element for the 
circumstance that the plate or recording equipment is to be used for 
making a copy of a sound recording of a performance.
(5) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
No need to prove which recording is to be copied
(8) In a prosecution for an offence against this section, it is not 
necessary to prove which particular recording is intended to be, or 
will be, copied using the device.
  
Division 3  Offences
248QC  Copying unauthorised sound recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a sound recording of a 
performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a sound recording of a 
performance; and
(b) the copy is made during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes a copy of a sound recording of a 
performance; and
  
Offences  Division 3
(b) the copy is made during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248QD  Selling etc. unauthorised sound recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts:
(i) sells a sound recording of a performance;
(ii) lets for hire a sound recording of a performance;
(iii) by way of trade offers or exposes for sale or hire a 
sound recording of a performance; and
(b) the act is done during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts:
(i) sells a sound recording of a performance;
(ii) lets for hire a sound recording of a performance;
(iii) by way of trade offers or exposes for sale or hire a 
sound recording of a performance; and
  
Division 3  Offences
(b) the act is done during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person does any of the following acts:
(i) sells a sound recording of a performance;
(ii) lets for hire a sound recording of a performance;
(iii) by way of trade offers or exposes for sale or hire a 
sound recording of a performance; and
(b) the act is done during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248QE  Distributing unauthorised sound recording
Indictable offences
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a sound recording of a performance, 
with the intention of trade; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the 50-year protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
  
Offences  Division 3
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a sound recording of a performance; 
and
(b) the distribution occurs during the 50-year protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the distribution will affect prejudicially the financial interests 
of the performer in the performance; and
(d) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
(3) An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on 
conviction by a fine of not more than 550 penalty units or 
imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offences
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a sound recording of a performance, 
with the intention of trade; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the 50-year protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a sound recording of a performance; 
and
(b) the distribution occurs during the 50-year protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the distribution will affect prejudicially the financial interests 
of the performer in the performance; and
(d) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
  
Division 3  Offences
(6) An offence against subsection (4) or (5) is a summary offence, 
despite section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(7) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person distributes a sound recording of a performance in 
preparation for, or in the course of, trade; and
(b) the distribution occurs during the 50-year protection period 
of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(9) Subsection (7) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248QF  Commercial possession or import of unauthorised sound 
recording
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses, or imports into Australia, a sound 
recording of a performance, with the intention of doing any 
of the following:
(i) selling the recording;
(ii) letting the recording for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing the recording for 
sale or hire;
(iv) distributing the recording either for the purpose of trade 
or to an extent that will affect prejudicially the financial 
interests of the performer in the performance; and
(b) the possession or import occurs during the 50-year protection 
period of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
  
Offences  Division 3
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses, or imports into Australia, a sound 
recording of a performance, with the intention of doing any 
of the following:
(i) selling the recording;
(ii) letting the recording for hire;
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing the recording for 
sale or hire;
(iv) distributing the recording either for the purpose of trade 
or to an extent that will affect prejudicially the financial 
interests of the performer in the performance; and
(b) the possession or import occurs during the 50-year protection 
period of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person possesses, or imports into Australia, a sound 
recording of a performance in preparation for, or in the 
course of, doing any of the following:
(i) selling the recording;
(ii) letting the recording for hire;
  
Division 3  Offences
(iii) by way of trade offering or exposing the recording for 
sale or hire;
(iv) distributing the recording for trade; and
(b) the possession or import occurs during the 50-year protection 
period of the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248QG  Exhibiting unauthorised sound recording in public by way 
of trade
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits in public a sound 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the exhibition occurs during the 50-year protection period of 
the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits in public a sound 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the exhibition occurs during the 50-year protection period of 
the performance; and
  
Offences  Division 3
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person by way of trade exhibits in public a sound 
recording of a performance; and
(b) the exhibition occurs during the 50-year protection period of 
the performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
248QH  Importing unauthorised sound recording for exhibition by 
way of trade
Indictable offence
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports into Australia a sound recording of a 
performance, with the intention of exhibiting the recording in 
public by way of trade; and
(b) the import occurs during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
(2) An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction by a 
fine of not more than 550 penalty units or imprisonment for not 
more than 5 years, or both.
  
Division 3  Offences
Note: A corporation may be fined up to 5 times the amount of the maximum 
fine (see subsection 4B(3) of the Crimes Act 1914).
Summary offence
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports into Australia a sound recording of a 
performance, with the intention of exhibiting the recording in 
public by way of trade; and
(b) the import occurs during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording and the person is 
negligent as to that fact.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
(4) An offence against subsection (3) is a summary offence, despite 
section 4G of the Crimes Act 1914.
Strict liability offence
(5) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person imports into Australia a sound recording of a 
performance in preparation for exhibiting the recording in 
public by way of trade; and
(b) the import occurs during the 50-year protection period of the 
performance; and
(c) the recording is an unauthorised recording.
Penalty: 60 penalty units.
(6) Subsection (5) is an offence of strict liability.
Note: For strict liability, see section 6.1 of the Criminal Code.
  
Offences  Division 3
Subdivision C—Prosecution and infringement notices
248R  Courts in which offences may be prosecuted
(1) Prosecutions for offences against Subdivision A or B may be 
brought in the Federal Court of Australia or in any other court of 
competent jurisdiction.
(2) However, the Federal Court of Australia does not have jurisdiction 
to hear or determine prosecutions for indictable offences, despite 
section 15C of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901.
(3) The Federal Court of Australia has jurisdiction to hear and 
determine prosecutions of the following offences against 
Subdivision A or B:
(a) summary offences;
(b) offences of strict liability.
248S  Protection against multiple proceedings for same act
If a single act done in relation to a performance is an offence 
against Subdivision A and an offence against Subdivision B, only 
one of the offences may be prosecuted.
248SA  Infringement notices
(1) The regulations may make provision enabling a person who is 
alleged to have committed an offence of strict liability against 
Subdivision A or B to pay a penalty to the Commonwealth as an 
alternative to prosecution.
(2) The penalty must equal one-fifth of the maximum fine that a court 
could impose on the person as a penalty for that offence.
  
Division 3  Offences
Subdivision D—Destruction or delivery up of unauthorised 
recordings
248T  Destruction or delivery up of unauthorised recordings
The court before which a person is charged with an offence against 
this Part may, whether the person is convicted of the offence or 
not, order that any article in the possession of the person that 
appears to the court to be:
(a) an unauthorised recording of a performance, or a copy of 
such a recording; or
(b) a plate or recording equipment used, or intended to be used, 
for making an unauthorised recording of a performance, or 
copies of such a recording;
be destroyed or delivered up to the performer or performers 
concerned or otherwise dealt with in such manner as the court 
thinks fit.
  
Extension of protection to foreign countries  Division 4
Division 4—Extension of protection to foreign countries
248U  Application to foreign countries
(1) Subject to this section, the regulations may apply any of the 
provisions of this Part specified in the regulations, in relation to a 
foreign country so specified, in any one or more of the following 
ways:
(a) so that the provisions apply in relation to performances given 
in that country in like manner as those provisions apply in 
relation to performances given in Australia;
(aa) so that the provisions apply in relation to recordings, made in 
that country, of performances in like manner as those 
provisions apply in relation to recordings of performances 
given in Australia;
(ab) so that the provisions apply in relation to broadcasts, made in 
that country, of performances in like manner as those 
provisions apply in relation to broadcasts of performances 
given in Australia;
(ac) so that the provisions apply in relation to recordings, made 
by persons who are citizens, nationals or residents of that 
country, of performances in like manner as those provisions 
apply in relation to recordings of performances given in 
Australia;
(b) so that the provisions apply in relation to persons who are 
citizens or nationals of that country in like manner as those 
provisions apply in relation to persons who are Australian 
citizens;
(c) so that the provisions apply in relation to persons who are 
resident in that country in like manner as those provisions 
apply in relation to persons who are resident in Australia.
(2) Regulations applying a provision of this Part in relation to a 
foreign country:
  
Division 4  Extension of protection to foreign countries
(a) may apply the provision without exception or modification or 
subject to such exceptions or modifications as are specified 
in the regulations; and
(b) may apply the provision either generally or in relation to such 
classes of performances, or other classes of cases, as are 
specified in the regulations.
(3) Before the Governor-General makes a regulation for the purposes 
of subsection (1) applying a provision of this Part in relation to a 
foreign country:
(a) the country must be a party to an international agreement 
specified, in relation to the provision of this Part, by the 
regulations for the purposes of this paragraph; or
(b) the Minister must be satisfied that adequate protection is or 
will be given under the law of the country to performers in 
performances:
(i) protected under this Act; and
(ii) to which the provision of this Part relates.
248V  Denial of protection to citizens of countries not giving 
adequate protection to Australian performances
(2) The regulations may, subject to subsection (3), provide, either 
generally or in such cases as are specified in the regulations, that 
this Part does not apply to performances given after a day specified 
in the regulations (which may be a day before the commencement 
of the regulations or of this Part) if, at the time the performances 
were or are given, the performers were or are citizens or nationals 
of a foreign country specified in the regulations, other than persons 
resident in Australia.
(3) Before the Governor-General makes a regulation for the purposes 
of subsection (2) in relation to a foreign country:
(a) the Minister must be satisfied that that the law of the country 
does not give adequate protection to Australian performances 
(whether the lack of protection relates to all or any of the 
ways that the provisions may be applied by the regulations 
under subsection 248U(1)); and
  
Extension of protection to foreign countries  Division 4
(b) the Minister must have regard to the nature and extent of that 
lack of protection.
  
  
Part XII—Regulations
  
249  Regulations
General regulation-making power
(1) The Governor-General may make regulations, not inconsistent with 
this Act, prescribing all matters that are required or permitted by 
this Act to be prescribed or are necessary or convenient to be 
prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this Act and, in 
particular, prescribing penalties not exceeding a fine of $100 for 
offences against the regulations. 
Regulations in relation to technological protection measures
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the Governor-General may make 
regulations prescribing the doing of an act by a person for the 
purposes of subsections 116AN(9) and 132APC(9).
Note: For prescription of acts and persons by class, see subsection 13(3) of 
the Legislation Act 2003.
(3) However, the Governor-General must not make a regulation 
prescribing the doing of an act by a person unless the Minister 
makes a recommendation to prescribe the doing of the act by the 
person.
(4) The Minister may only make a recommendation to prescribe the 
doing of an act by a person if:
(a) a submission has been made (whether before or after the 
commencement of this section) to prescribe the doing of the 
act by the person; and
(b) the doing of the act by the person will not infringe the 
copyright in a work or other subject-matter; and
(c) the doing of the act by the person is in relation to a particular 
class of works or other subject-matter; and
  
  
(d) an actual or likely adverse impact on the doing of the act by 
the person has been credibly demonstrated; and
(e) the adequacy of the protection and the effectiveness of the 
remedies provided by Subdivision A of Division 2A of 
Part V and Subdivision E of Division 5 of Part V would not 
be impaired if the doing of the act by the person were 
prescribed.
Note: For the purposes of paragraph (a), it is not necessary for the person 
who made the submission to be the person in relation to whom the act 
is prescribed.
(5) If a submission has been made to prescribe the doing of an act by a 
person, the Minister must make a decision whether to recommend 
the prescription of the doing of the act by the person as soon as 
practicable after receiving the submission, but in any case, within 4 
years of receiving it.
(6) The Governor-General may make regulations varying or revoking 
regulations made under subsection (2).
(7) However, the Governor-General must not make a regulation 
varying or revoking a regulation made under subsection (2) unless 
the Minister makes a recommendation to vary or revoke the 
regulation.
(8) The Minister may make a recommendation to vary or revoke a 
regulation made under subsection (2) only if:
(a) a submission has been made to vary or revoke the regulation; 
and
(b) an actual or likely adverse impact on the doing of the act by 
the person that is the subject of the regulation can no longer 
be credibly demonstrated; and
(c) the adequacy of the protection and the effectiveness of the 
remedies provided by Subdivision A of Division 2A of 
Part V and Subdivision E of Division 5 of Part V would be 
impaired if the regulation were not varied or revoked.
(9) If a submission has been made to vary or revoke a regulation made 
under subsection (2), the Minister must make a decision whether to 
  
  
recommend the variation or revocation of the regulation as soon as 
practicable after receiving the submission, but in any case, within 4 
years of receiving it.
  The Schedule
  
The Schedule  
  
OATH 
I,  , do swear that I will be 
faithful and bear true allegiance to (insert name of the Sovereign), 
(insert applicable pronoun, such as “His” or “Her”) Heirs and 
Successors according to law, that I will well and truly serve (insert 
applicable pronoun, such as “Him” or “Her”) in the office of
and that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that 
office.
SO HELP ME GOD!
AFFIRMATION
I,  , do solemnly and sincerely 
promise and declare that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance 
to (insert name of the Sovereign), (insert applicable pronoun, such 
as “His” or “Her”) Heirs and Successors according to law, that I 
will well and truly serve (insert applicable pronoun, such as 
“Him” or “Her”) in the office of and that I will 
faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that office.
Endnotes
Endnote 1—About the endnotes
Endnotes
Endnote 1—About the endnotes
The endnotes provide information about this compilation and the compiled law.
The following endnotes are included in every compilation:
Endnote 1—About the endnotes
Endnote 2—Abbreviation key
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Abbreviation key—Endnote 2
The abbreviation key sets out abbreviations that may be used in the endnotes.
Legislation history and amendment history—Endnotes 3 and 4
Amending laws are annotated in the legislation history and amendment history.
The legislation history in endnote 3 provides information about each law that 
has amended (or will amend) the compiled law. The information includes 
commencement details for amending laws and details of any application, saving 
or transitional provisions that are not included in this compilation.
The amendment history in endnote 4 provides information about amendments at 
the provision (generally section or equivalent) level. It also includes information 
about any provision of the compiled law that has been repealed in accordance 
with a provision of the law.
Editorial changes
The Legislation Act 2003 authorises First Parliamentary Counsel to make 
editorial and presentational changes to a compiled law in preparing a 
compilation of the law for registration. The changes must not change the effect 
of the law. Editorial changes take effect from the compilation registration date.
If the compilation includes editorial changes, the endnotes include a brief 
outline of the changes in general terms. Full details of any changes can be 
obtained from the Office of Parliamentary Counsel.
Misdescribed amendments
A misdescribed amendment is an amendment that does not accurately describe 
how an amendment is to be made. If, despite the misdescription, the amendment 
Endnotes
Endnote 1—About the endnotes
can be given effect as intended, then the misdescribed amendment can be 
incorporated through an editorial change made under section 15V of the 
Legislation Act 2003.
If a misdescribed amendment cannot be given effect as intended, the 
amendment is not incorporated and “(md not incorp)” is added to the 
amendment history.
Endnotes
Endnote 2—Abbreviation key
Endnote 2—Abbreviation key
ad = added or inserted o = order(s)
am = amended Ord = Ordinance
amdt = amendment orig = original
c = clause(s) par = paragraph(s)/subparagraph(s)
C[x] = Compilation No. x /sub-subparagraph(s)
Ch = Chapter(s) pres = present
def = definition(s) prev = previous
Dict = Dictionary (prev…) = previously
disallowed = disallowed by Parliament Pt = Part(s)
Div = Division(s) r = regulation(s)/rule(s)
ed = editorial change reloc = relocated
exp = expires/expired or ceases/ceased to have renum = renumbered
effect rep = repealed
F = Federal Register of Legislation rs = repealed and substituted
gaz = gazette s = section(s)/subsection(s)
LA = Legislation Act 2003 Sch = Schedule(s)
LIA = Legislative Instruments Act 2003 Sdiv = Subdivision(s)
(md) = misdescribed amendment can be given SLI = Select Legislative Instrument
effect SR = Statutory Rules
(md not incorp) = misdescribed amendment Sub-Ch = Sub-Chapter(s)
cannot be given effect SubPt = Subpart(s)
mod = modified/modification underlining = whole or part not
No. = Number(s) commenced or to be commenced
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Copyright Act 1968 63, 1968 27 June 1968 1 May 1969 (see 
Gazette 1969, p. 2543)
Statute Law Revision 
Act 1973
216, 1973 19 Dec 1973 31 Dec 1973 ss. 9(1) and 10 
Administrative Changes 
(Consequential 
Provisions) Act 1976
91, 1976 20 Sept 1976 s 4: 20 Sept 1976 (s 
2(1))
Sch: 22 Dec 1975 (s 
2(7))
s 4 
Broadcasting and 
Television Amendment 
Act 1977
160, 1977 10 Nov 1977 1 Jan 1978 (see 
Gazette 1977, No. 
S259)
—
Jurisdiction of Courts 
(Miscellaneous 
Amendments) Act 1979
19, 1979 28 Mar 1979 Parts II–XVII (ss. 3–
123): 15 May 1979 
(see Gazette 1979, No. 
S86)
Remainder: 19 Mar 
1979
ss. 9 and 124 
Copyright Amendment 
Act 1980
154, 1980 19 Sept 1980 ss. 17–19: 29 Sept 
1980
Remainder: 1 Aug 
1981 (see Gazette 
1981, No. S124)
—
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Designs Amendment Act 
1981
42, 1981 13 May 1981 ss. 1 and 2: 13 Mar 
1981 
s. 31, Part IV (ss. 34, 
35) and s. 36(2): 1 Apr 
1982 (see Gazette 
1982, No. G12)
Remainder: 1 Apr 
1982 (see Gazette 
1982, No. G12)
s. 36 
Statute Law Revision 
Act 1981
61, 1981 12 June 1981 Sch 1: 12 June 1981 (s 
2(1))
—
Broadcasting and 
Television Amendment 
Act 1981
113, 1981 24 June 1981 s. 30: 10 Aug 1981 
(see Gazette 1981, No. 
S158)
Remainder: 24 June 
1981
—
Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous 
Amendments) Act 
(No. 1) 1982
26, 1982 7 May 1982 Part XVIII (s. 
136–145): 4 June 
1982)
s. 138(2) 
Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous 
Amendments) Act 
(No. 2) 1982
80, 1982 22 Sept 1982 Part LXXVII (s. 280): 
22 Sept 1982
s. 280(2) and (3) 
Broadcasting and 
Television Amendment 
Act 1982
154, 1982 31 Dec 1982 31 Dec 1982 —
Australian Broadcasting 
Corporation 
(Transitional Provisions 
and Consequential 
Amendments) Act 1983
7, 1983 1 June 1983 ss. 1, 2, 15(1) and 24: 
1 June 1983
Remainder: 1 July 
1983 (see s. 2(2) and 
Gazette 1983, No. 
S124)
s. 60(2) 
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Copyright Amendment 
Act 1983
80, 1983 3 Nov 1983 6 June 1984 (see 
Gazette 1984, No. 
S203)
—
Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act (No. 2) 
1983
91, 1983 22 Nov 1983 s 3, 6: 20 Dec 1983 (s 
2(1))
s 6 
Radiocommunications 
(Transitional Provisions 
and Consequential 
Amendments) Act 1983
136, 1983 22 Dec 1983 27 Aug 1985 (see s. 2 
and Gazette 1985, No. 
S322)
—
Copyright Amendment 
Act 1984
43, 1984 15 June 1984 15 June 1984 s. 7 
Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act (No. 2) 
1984
165, 1984 25 Oct 1984 s 6(1), 7 and Sch 1: 22 
Nov 1984 (s 2(1))
s 6(1) and 7
Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act (No. 1) 
1985
65, 1985 5 June 1985 Sch 1: 3 July 1985 (s 
2(1))
—
Broadcasting and 
Television 
(Consequential 
Amendments) Act 1985
67, 1985 5 June 1985 1 Jan 1986 s 4 
Copyright Amendment 
Act 1986
78, 1986 24 June 1986 s 14–19: 22 July 1986 
(s 2(2))
Remainder: 30 Apr 
1987 (s 2(1) and gaz 
1987, No S68)
s 20(2) and 28(2)
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Statute Law 
(Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act (No. 2) 
1986
168, 1986 18 Dec 1986 s 5(1): 18 Dec 1986 (s 
2(1))
Sch 1: 30 Apr 1987 (s 
2(3))
s 5(1)
Jurisdiction of Courts 
(Miscellaneous 
Amendments) Act 1987
23, 1987 26 May 1987 s 5: 26 May 1987 (s 
2(1)
Sch: 1 Sept 1987 (s 
2(2) and gaz 1987, No 
S217)
s 5
Broadcasting Legislation 
Amendment Act 1988
146, 1988 26 Dec 1988 Sch 5: 1 Mar 1989 (s 
2(3))
—
Circuit Layouts Act 
1989
28, 1989 22 May 1989 ss. 1 and 2: Royal 
Assent
Remainder: 1 Oct 
1990 (see Gazette 
1990, No. S261)
—
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Copyright Amendment 
Act 1989
32, 1989 24 May 1989 s 3, 5, 7, 12, 13, 21, 
22, 28 and Sch 
(items 1, 4, 10, 12, 14, 
19, 25, 26): 1 Oct 
1989 (s 2(2) and gaz 
1989, No S316)
s 4, 14, 16, 18, 20, 23, 
25, 27, 29 and Sch 
(items 48, 49, 53): 29 
Jan 1990 (s 2(2) and 
gaz 1990, No S15)
s 6, 15, 19, 24, 26(a) 
and Sch (items 2, 3, 6–
9, 11, 13, 15, 18, 21–
24, 27–47, 50–52): 
1 July 1990 (s 2(2) and 
gaz 1990, No S164)
s 8–11, 17 and Sch 
(items 5, 16, 17, 20): 1 
Oct 1990 (s 2(2) and 
gaz 1990, No S261)
s 26(b)–(f): 2 July 
1990 (s 2(2) and gaz 
1990, No S164)
Remainder: 24 May 
1989 (s 2(1))
s 25 and 29
as repealed by
Copyright 
Amendment 
(Re-enactment) Act 
1993
107, 1993 22 Dec 1993 s 13: 22 Dec 1993 (s 
2(1))
s 2(2)
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
as re-enacted by
Copyright 
Amendment 
(Re-enactment) Act 
1993
107, 1993 22 Dec 1993 s 3–12 and Sch: 22 
Dec 1993 (s 2(1))
s 8 and 10–12 
Copyright Amendment 
Act 1991
174, 1991 25 Nov 1991 23 Dec 1991 —
Special Broadcasting 
Service Act 1991
180, 1991 25 Nov 1991 s 116: 23 Dec 1991 (s 
2(1))
s 116(2)
Broadcasting Services 
(Transitional Provisions 
and Consequential 
Amendments) Act 1992
105, 1992 9 July 1992 5 Oct 1992 (see s. 2 
and Gazette 1992, No. 
GN38)
s. 3
Radiocommunications 
(Transitional Provisions 
and Consequential 
Amendments) Act 1992
167, 1992 11 Dec 1992 1 July 1993 s. 14(3)
Copyright Amendment 
(Re-enactment) Act 
1993
107, 1993 22 Dec 1993 22 Dec 1993 ss. 8 and 10–12
Agricultural and 
Veterinary Chemicals 
(Consequential 
Amendments) Act 1994
37, 1994 15 Mar 1994 15 Mar 1995 (see s. 2) —
Law and Justice 
Legislation Amendment 
Act (No. 2) 1994
141, 1994 28 Nov 1994 s 4 (items 1–13, 15–
30, 32–112): 28 Nov 
1994 (s 2(1))
s 4 (items 14, 31): 23 
Dec 1991 (s 2(4))
s 7
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Copyright (World Trade 
Organization 
Amendments) Act 1994
149, 1994 13 Dec 1994 s 1 and 2: 13 Dec 1994 
(s 2(2))
Parts 3 and 4 (s 6–17): 
1 July 1995 (s 2(4))
Remainder: 1 Jan 1996 
(s 2(3))
—
Intellectual Property 
Laws Amendment Act 
1998
100, 1998 27 July 1998 Sch 2 (items 1–3): 27 
Jan 1999 (s 2(4)(5))
—
Copyright Amendment 
Act (No. 1) 1998
104, 1998 30 July 1998 Sch 2 (items 6, 8, 10, 
12) and Sch 8 
(item 12): 30 Jan 2000 
(s 2(2))
Remainder: 30 July 
1998 (s 2(1))
Sch. 1 (item 4), 
Sch. 3 (item 4), 
Sch. 4 (item 6), 
Sch. 9 (item 8) 
and Sch. 10 
(item 51) 
Copyright Amendment 
Act (No. 2) 1998
105, 1998 30 July 1998 30 July 1998 (s 
2(1)(2))
Sch 1 (item 9)
Copyright Amendment 
(Computer Programs) 
Act 1999
105, 1999 24 Aug 1999 30 Sept 1999 (see 
Gazette 1999, No. 
S462)
—
Public Employment 
(Consequential and 
Transitional) 
Amendment Act 1999
146, 1999 11 Nov 1999 Sch 1 (item 338): 5 
Dec 1999 (see s 
2(1)(2) and gaz 1999, 
No. S584)
—
Copyright Amendment 
(Digital Agenda) Act 
2000
110, 2000 4 Sept 2000 4 Mar 2001 (s 2(2)) Sch 2
as amended by
Statute Law Revision 
Act 2002
63, 2002 3 July 2002 Sch 2 (items 4, 5): 4 
Mar 2001 (s 2(1) 
items 33, 34)
—
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Copyright Amendment 
(Moral Rights) Act 2000
159, 2000 21 Dec 2000 Sch 2: 4 Mar 2001 (s 
2(3))
Remainder: Royal 
Assent 
Sch 1 (item 3) 
Law and Justice 
Legislation Amendment 
(Application of Criminal 
Code) Act 2001
24, 2001 6 Apr 2001 s 4(1), (2) and Sch 9: 
24 May 2001 (s 
2(1)(a))
s 4(1) and (2) 
Copyright Amendment 
(Parallel Importation) 
Act 2003
34, 2003 15 Apr 2003 Sch 3 (items 1–3, 5, 
7): 4 Mar 2001 (s 2(1) 
items 4, 6, 8)
Sch 3 (items 4, 6, 8, 
9): 15 Apr 2003 (s 
2(1) items 5, 7, 9)
Sch 4: 13 May 2003 (s 
2(1) item 10)
Remainder: Royal 
Assent
Sch 1 (item 20), 
Sch 3 (item 9) and 
Sch 4 (items 14, 
15) 
Designs (Consequential 
Amendments) Act 2003
148, 2003 17 Dec 2003 Sch 1: 17 June 2004 (s 
2(1) item 2)
Sch 1 (items 15–
20) 
US Free Trade 
Agreement 
Implementation Act 
2004
120, 2004 16 Aug 2004 Sch 9 (items 1–15, 59–
112, 114–119–166, 
168–191): 1 Jan 2005 
(s 2(1) items 9, 11, 12, 
14–18, 20)
Sch 9 (items 16–58): 
26 July 2007 (s 2(1) 
item 10 and gaz 2007, 
No GN22)
Sch 9 (items 113, 
167): 16 Aug 2004 
(s 2(1) items 13, 19)
Sch 9 (items 15, 
84, 106, 117–119, 
131–133, 145, 
160, 185, 190)
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
as amended by
Copyright Legislation 
Amendment Act 2004
154, 2004 15 Dec 2004 Sch 1 (items 42–61): 1 
Jan 2005 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
—
Copyright Legislation 
Amendment Act 2004
154, 2004 15 Dec 2004 Sch 1 (items 1–41): 
1 Jan 2005 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
Sch 1 (items 8, 16, 
29, 31, 41) 
Australian 
Communications and 
Media Authority 
(Consequential and 
Transitional Provisions) 
Act 2005
45, 2005 1 Apr 2005 Schedule 1 (items 59–
62) and Schedule 4: 
1 July 2005 (see s. 
2(1))
Sch 4
as amended by
Omnibus Repeal Day 
(Autumn 2014) Act 
2014
109, 2014 16 Oct 2014 Sch 2 (items 177–
181): 17 Oct 2014 
(s 2(1) item 2)
—
Copyright Amendment 
(Film Directors’ Rights) 
Act 2005
130, 2005 8 Nov 2005 Schedule 1: 19 Dec 
2005 (see 
F2005L04088)
Remainder: Royal 
Assent
s 4
Statute Law Revision 
Act 2006
9, 2006 23 Mar 2006 Schedule 1 (items 8, 
9): 1 Jan 2005 (s 2(1) 
item 6)
Sch. 1 (item 9) 
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Copyright Amendment 
Act 2006
158, 2006 11 Dec 2006 Sch 1 (items 1–33), 
Sch 2–5 and Sch 12 
(items 1–16): 1 Jan 
2007 (s 2(1) items 2, 
4, 9)
Sch 1 (item 34) and 
Sch 12 (items 17, 18): 
never commenced (s 
2(1) items 3, 10)
Sch 9: 8 Jan 2007 (s 
2(1) item 6)
Remainder: 11 Dec 
2006 (s 2(1) items 1, 
5, 7, 8)
Sch 1 (items 9, 12, 
14, 16, 18, 22, 24, 
26), Sch 2 
(item 15), Sch 3 
(item 20), Sch 4 
(item 2), Sch 5 
(items 2, 6), Sch 6 
(item 9AA), Sch 9 
(item 2), Sch 10 
(items 5, 20, 30, 
55, 58, 61, 63), 
Sch 11 (items 3, 
37, 40, 42, 57) 
and Sch 12 
(item 16) 
Australian Citizenship 
(Transitionals and 
Consequentials) Act 
2007
21, 2007 15 Mar 2007 Schedules 1–3: 1 July 
2007 (see s. 2(1) and 
F2007L01653)
Remainder: Royal 
Assent
—
Broadcasting Legislation 
Amendment Act 2007
28, 2007 15 Mar 2007 15 Mar 2007 —
Statute Law Revision 
Act 2008
73, 2008 3 July 2008 Schedule 4 (item 200): 
4 July 2008
—
Archives Amendment 
Act 2008
113, 2008 31 Oct 2008 1 Nov 2008 —
Statute Law Revision 
Act 2010
8, 2010 1 Mar 2010 Sch 5 (item 137(a)): 
1 Mar 2010 (s 2(1) 
item 38)
—
Broadcasting Legislation 
Amendment (Digital 
Television) Act 2010
94, 2010 29 June 2010 Schedule 1 
(items 135–144): 
30 June 2010
—
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Broadcasting Legislation 
Amendment (Digital 
Dividend and Other 
Measures) Act 2011
36, 2011 26 May 2011 Schedule 2 (item 61): 
27 May 2011
—
Therapeutic Goods 
Legislation Amendment 
(Copyright) Act 2011
39, 2011 27 May 2011 28 May 2011 Sch. 1 (items 2, 3) 
Acts Interpretation 
Amendment Act 2011
46, 2011 27 June 2011 Schedule 2 (items 445, 
446) and Schedule 3 
(items 10, 11): 27 Dec 
2011
Sch. 3 (items 10, 
11) 
Intellectual Property 
Laws Amendment 
(Raising the Bar) Act 
2012
35, 2012 15 Apr 2012 Schedule 5 (items 1–
16): 15 Apr 2013
—
Statute Law Revision 
Act 2012
136, 2012 22 Sept 2012 Schedule 1 (item 37): 
Royal Assent
—
Australian Charities and 
Not-for-profits 
Commission 
(Consequential and 
Transitional) Act 2012
169, 2012 3 Dec 2012 Schedule 2 
(items 169–172): 3 
Dec 2012 (see s. 2(1))
—
Federal Circuit Court of 
Australia (Consequential 
Amendments) Act 2013
13, 2013 14 Mar 2013 Sch 1 (items 93–95) 
and Sch 2 (item 2): 12 
Apr 2013 (s 2(1) 
items 2, 3)
—
Statute Law Revision 
Act (No 1) 2014
31, 2014 27 May 2014 Sch 1 (items 11, 12) 
and Sch 8 (item 12): 
24 June 2014
—
Customs and Other 
Legislation Amendment 
(Australian Border 
Force) Act 2015
41, 2015 20 May 2015 Sch 5 (item 27), Sch 6 
(items 23–49) and Sch 
9: 1 July 2015 (s 2(1) 
items 2, 7)
Sch 6 (item 49) 
and Sch 9
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
as amended by
Australian Border 
Force Amendment 
(Protected 
Information) Act 2017
115, 2017 30 Oct 2017 Sch 1 (item 26): 1 July 
2015 (s 2(1) item 2)
—
Norfolk Island 
Legislation Amendment 
Act 2015
59, 2015 26 May 2015 Sch 2 (items 99–101): 
1 July 2016 (s 2(1) 
item 5)
Sch 2 (items 356–
396): 18 June 2015 (s 
2(1) item 6)
Sch 2 (items 356–
396)
as amended by
Territories Legislation 
Amendment Act 2016
33, 2016 23 Mar 2016 Sch 2: 24 Mar 2016 
(s 2(1) item 2)
—
Copyright Amendment 
(Online Infringement) 
Act 2015
80, 2015 26 June 2015 27 June 2015 (s 2) —
Civil Law and Justice 
Legislation Amendment 
Act 2015
113, 2015 17 Aug 2015 Sch 7: 17 Feb 2016 
(s 2(1) item 3)
Sch 7 (item 7)
Acts and Instruments 
(Framework Reform) 
(Consequential 
Provisions) Act 2015
126, 2015 10 Sept 2015 Sch 1 (item 149): 5 
Mar 2016 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
—
Health Legislation 
Amendment (eHealth) 
Act 2015
157, 2015 26 Nov 2015 Sch 1 (items 1, 2, 111–
136): 27 Nov 2015 
(s 2(1) item 2)
Sch 1 (items 111–
136)
Statute Law Revision 
Act (No. 1) 2016
4, 2016 11 Feb 2016 Sch 4 (items 1, 72): 10 
Mar 2016 (s 2(1) 
item 6)
—
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Courts Administration 
Legislation Amendment 
Act 2016
24, 2016 18 Mar 2016 Sch 5 (item 17): 1 July 
2016 (s 2(1) item 7)
Sch 6: 18 Mar 2016 
(s 2(1) item 9)
Sch 6
Territories Legislation 
Amendment Act 2016
33, 2016 23 Mar 2016 Sch 5 (item 29): 1 July 
2016 (s 2(1) item 7)
—
Statute Update (A.C.T. 
Self-Government 
(Consequential 
Provisions) Regulations) 
Act 2017
13, 2017 22 Feb 2017 Sch 1 (items 7–13): 
22 Mar 2017 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
—
Copyright Amendment 
(Disability Access and 
Other Measures) Act 
2017
49, 2017 22 June 2017 Sch 1 and Sch 3 
(items 9–19): 22 Dec 
2017 (s 2(1) items 2, 
5)
Sch 2: 1 Jan 2019 
(s 2(1) item 3)
Sch 3 (items 1–8): 
23 June 2017 (s 2(1) 
item 4)
Sch 1 (items 79–
84), Sch 2 
(items 29–31) and 
Sch 3 (items 7, 8, 
19)
Copyright Amendment 
(Service Providers) Act 
2018
71, 2018 29 June 2018 29 Dec 2018 (s 2(1) 
item 1)
—
Intellectual Property 
Laws Amendment 
(Productivity 
Commission Response 
Part 1 and Other 
Measures) Act 2018
77, 2018 24 Aug 2018 Sch 1 (items 1, 6) and 
Sch 2 (items 300, 301, 
306): 25 Aug 2018 
(s 2(1) items 2, 11)
Sch 1 (item 6) and 
Sch 2 (item 306)
Copyright Amendment 
(Online Infringement) 
Act 2018
157, 2018 10 Dec 2018 11 Dec 2018 (s 2(1) 
item 1)
Sch 1 (item 12)
Endnotes
Endnote 3—Legislation history
Act Number 
and year
Assent Commencement Application, 
saving and 
transitional 
provisions
Territories Legislation 
Amendment Act 2020
154, 2020 17 Dec 2020 Sch 4 (items 3–6): 18 
Dec 2020 (s 2(1) 
item 12)
—
Federal Circuit and 
Family Court of 
Australia (Consequential 
Amendments and 
Transitional Provisions) 
Act 2021
13, 2021 1 Mar 2021 Sch 2 (items 231–
237): 1 Sept 2021 (s 
2(1) item 5)
—
Competition and 
Consumer Amendment 
(Motor Vehicle Service 
and Repair Information 
Sharing Scheme) Act 
2021
54, 2021 24 June 2021 Sch 1 (items 26, 27): 
1 July 2022 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
—
Statute Law Amendment 
(Prescribed Forms and 
Other Updates) Act 2023
74, 2023 20 Sept 2023 Sch 1 (items 20–23): 
20 Mar 2024 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
Sch 1 (item 23)
Administrative Review 
Tribunal (Consequential 
and Transitional 
Provisions No. 1) Act 
2024
38, 2024 31 May 2024 Sch 6 (items 1, 10): 14 
Oct 2024 (s 2(1) 
item 2)
—
Crown References 
Amendment Act 2024
115, 2024 10 Dec 2024 Sch 1 (items 8, 9): 11 
Dec 2024 (s 2(1) item 
1)
—
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Title................................................. am. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993) 
Part I
s. 3................................................... rep. No. 216, 1973 
s. 4................................................... rs. No. 216, 1973 
s. 8................................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 42, 1981
rs. No. 165, 1984 
s. 8A................................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 141, 1994 
s. 9................................................... am. No. 67, 1985 
s. 9A................................................ ad. No. 24, 2001
Part II
s 10.................................................. am No 216, 1973; No 160, 1977; No 154, 1980; No 113, 1981; 
No 154, 1982; No 7, 1983; No 136, 1983; No 43, 1984; No 165, 
1984; No 67, 1985; No 78, 1986; No 168, 1986; No 146, 1988; 
No 28, 1989; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 174, 1991; 
No 180, 1991; No 105, 1992; No 37, 1994; No 141, 1994; No 104, 
1998; No 105, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 34, 2003; No 148, 2003; 
No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006; No 21, 2007; No 28, 2007; No 113, 
2008; No 94, 2010; No 169, 2012; No 31, 2014; No 59, 2015; No 
113, 2015; No 13, 2017; No 49, 2017; No 154, 2020
s. 10AA........................................... ad. No. 105, 1998
s 10AB ............................................ ad No 34, 2003
s 10AC ............................................ ad No 34, 2003
s. 10AD........................................... ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 34, 2003
s 10A............................................... ad No 165, 1984
am No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 104, 
1998
rep No 49, 2017
s 11.................................................. am No 141, 1994
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 12.................................................. am No 216, 1973
s 14.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 49, 2017
s. 19................................................. am. No. 216, 1973 
s. 21................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
s 22.................................................. am No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 110, 
2000; No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006
s. 25................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
s. 26................................................. am. No. 141, 1994
rep. No. 110, 2000
s. 27................................................. am No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 141, 1994; No 110, 
2000
s. 28................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006
s. 29................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
s 29A............................................... ad No 49, 2017
s. 30A.............................................. ad. No. 149, 1994
Part III
Division 1
s. 31................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 149, 1994; No. 110, 2000
s. 32................................................. am. No. 141, 1994; No. 21, 2007
s 33.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004
rs No 49, 2017
s 34.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s. 35................................................. am. No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998
Division 2
s. 36................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
s. 37................................................. am. No. 174, 1991; No. 104, 1998
s. 38................................................. am. No. 174, 1991; No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998; No. 158, 2006
s. 39................................................. am. No. 141, 1994 
s. 39A.............................................. ad. No. 154, 1980 
am. No. 110, 2000 (as am. by No. 63, 2002); No. 34, 2003
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 39B .............................................. ad. No. 110, 2000
Division 3
s 40.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 110, 
2000; No 158, 2006
s. 41A.............................................. ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 42................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
s. 43................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 100, 1998 
s. 43A.............................................. ad. No. 43, 1984
rep. No. 105, 1999
ad. No. 110, 2000
s. 43B .............................................. ad. No. 120, 2004
am. No. 154, 2004
s. 43C .............................................. ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 44................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
s. 44A.............................................. ad. No. 174, 1991
am. No. 104, 1998
s. 44B .............................................. ad. No. 37, 1994
s. 44BA ........................................... ad. No. 39, 2011
s 44BB ............................................ ad No 157, 2015
s. 44C .............................................. ad. No. 104, 1998
am. No. 34, 2003
s. 44D.............................................. ad. No. 105, 1998
am. No. 34, 2003; No. 158, 2006
ss. 44E, 44F .................................... ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 158, 2006
Division 4
s. 46................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
s. 47................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 80, 1983; No. 141, 1994; No. 110, 2000; 
No. 113, 2008
s. 47AA........................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
s 47A............................................... ad No 78, 1986
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am No 105, 1992; No 167, 1992; No 104, 1998; No 24, 2001; No 
4, 2016
rep No 49, 2017
Division 4A
Division 4A..................................... ad No 105, 1999
s. 47AB ........................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
ss. 47B–47D.................................... ad. No. 105, 1999
am. No. 110, 2000
ss. 47E–47H.................................... ad. No. 105, 1999
Division 4B
Division 4B..................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 47J ................................................ ad No 158, 2006
Division 5
Division 5 heading.......................... rs No 104, 1998
s. 48................................................. rs. No. 154, 1980 
s. 48A.............................................. ad. No. 165, 1984
s 49.................................................. rs No 154, 1980
am No 165, 1984; No 141, 1994; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006; No 
49, 2017
s 50.................................................. rs No 154, 1980
am No 165, 1984; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006; No 49, 2017
s. 51................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 110, 2000; No. 120, 2004
s. 51AA........................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 110, 2000; No. 113, 2008
s 51A............................................... ad No 154, 1980
am No 78, 1986; No 141, 1994; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 51B ............................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s. 52................................................. am. No. 91, 1983; No. 104, 1998; No. 110, 2000
s 53.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 34, 2003; No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Division 5A..................................... ad No 154, 1980
rep No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
s. 53A.............................................. ad. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 53B .............................................. ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 165, 1984
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 53C .............................................. ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 91, 1983
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
Division 5B..................................... ad No 154, 1980
rep No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
s. 53D.............................................. ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 165, 1984
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
Division 6
s 54.................................................. am No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 158, 2006; No 49, 
2017
s. 55................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 61, 1981; No. 32, 1989 (as am. by 
No. 107, 1993); No. 159, 2000; No. 158, 2006 
s. 56................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 57................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
s. 58................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 59................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006 
ss. 62, 63 ......................................... am. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 64................................................. am. No. 154, 1980 
Division 7
s. 65................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 68................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
s. 69................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 110, 2000
s. 70................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 80, 1983; No. 141, 1994; No. 113, 2008
s. 71................................................. rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993) 
Division 8
Division 8 heading.......................... am No 42, 1981
s. 74................................................. am. No. 216, 1973; No. 42, 1981
rs. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 148, 2003
s. 75................................................. am. No. 42, 1981
rs. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 148, 2003
s. 76................................................. am. No. 42, 1981
rs. No. 148, 2003
s. 77................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 42, 1981
rs. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 148, 2003
s. 77A.............................................. ad. No. 148, 2003
Division 9
s 79.................................................. am No 154, 1980
rs No 49, 2017
s 79A............................................... ad No 49, 2017
s 80.................................................. am No 154, 1980
rs No 49, 2017
s 81.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004; No 49, 2017
s. 82................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
s. 83................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
Part IV
Division 1
s. 84................................................. rs. No. 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am. No. 21, 2007
Division 2
s. 85................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 149, 1994; No. 110, 2000
s. 86................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
s. 87................................................. am. No. 154, 1980; No. 110, 2000
s. 88................................................. am. No. 110, 2000
Division 3
s. 91................................................. am. No. 160, 1977; Nos. 7 and 136, 1983; No. 78, 1986
rs. No. 146, 1988
am. No. 180, 1991; No. 167, 1992; No. 104, 1998
rs. No. 110, 2000
s. 91A.............................................. ad. No. 104, 1998
rep. No. 110, 2000
s. 92................................................. am. No. 154, 1980
Division 4
s 93.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004
rs No 49, 2017
s 94.................................................. am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
ss. 95, 96 ......................................... am. No. 154, 1980
Division 5
Subdivision A
Subdivision A heading.................... ad No 120, 2004
s. 97................................................. am. No. 120, 2004
s. 98................................................. am. No. 130, 2005; No. 158, 2006
s. 99................................................. am. No. 160, 1977; No. 154, 1980; No. 7, 1983; No. 78, 1986; 
No. 146, 1988; No. 180, 1991; No. 104, 1998
rs. No. 110, 2000
Subdivision B
Subdivision B ................................. ad No 120, 2004
ss. 100AA–100AF .......................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 100AG......................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
am. No. 158, 2006
s 100AH.......................................... ad No 120, 2004
am No 94, 2010; No 49, 2017
Division 6
s. 100A............................................ ad. No. 78, 1986
s. 101............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 110, 2000
s. 102............................................... am. No. 174, 1991; Nos. 104 and 105, 1998; No. 34, 2003
s. 103............................................... am. No. 174, 1991; No. 141, 1994; Nos. 104 and 105, 1998; 
No. 34, 2003; No. 158, 2006
s. 103A............................................ ad. No. 78, 1986
s. 103AA......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 103B ............................................ ad. No. 78, 1986
am. No. 110, 2000
s. 103C ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 104............................................... rs. No. 154, 1980 
am. No. 100, 1998
s. 104A............................................ ad. No. 165, 1984 
s. 104B ............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
s 104C ............................................. ad No 157, 2015
s. 105............................................... am. No. 154, 1980 
s. 106............................................... am. No. 169, 2012
s. 107............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 80, 1983; No. 141, 1994; No. 110, 2000; 
No. 113, 2008
s. 108............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
s. 109............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998
s. 109A............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
am. No. 8, 2010
s. 110............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s. 110AA......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 110A............................................ ad. No. 78, 1986 
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am. No. 110, 2000
s 110B ............................................. ad No 78, 1986 
am No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 110BA .......................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s. 110C ............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
s. 111............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993) 
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 111A............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
s. 111B ............................................ ad. No. 120, 2004
am. No. 154, 2004
s 112................................................ rs No 154, 1980
am No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 104, 
1998; No 158, 2006; No 49, 2017
s. 112A............................................ ad. No. 174, 1991
am. No. 104, 1998
s 112AA.......................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s. 112B ............................................ ad. No. 37, 1994 
s. 112C ............................................ ad. No. 104, 1998
am. No. 34, 2003; No. 158, 2006
s. 112D............................................ ad. No. 105, 1998
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 112DA......................................... ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 112E ............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
Division 7
s. 113............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
ss. 113A–113C................................ ad. No. 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Part IVA
Part IVA.......................................... ad No 49, 2017
Division 1
s 113D............................................. ad No 49, 2017
Division 2
s 113E ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113F ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
Division 3
Subdivision A
s 113G............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113H............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113J .............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113K............................................. ad No 49, 2017
Subdivision B
s 113L ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113M ............................................ ad No 49, 2017
Division 4
s 113N............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113P ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
am No 54, 2021
s 113Q............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113R ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113S ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113T ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113U............................................. ad No 49, 2017
Division 5
Subdivision A
s 113V............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113W............................................ ad No 49, 2017
s 113X............................................. ad No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Subdivision B
s 113Y............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113Z ............................................. ad No 49, 2017
s 113ZA .......................................... ad No 49, 2017
s 113ZB........................................... ad No 49, 2017
s 113ZC........................................... ad No 49, 2017
Part V
Part V heading ................................ rs No 110, 2000
Division 2
s. 115............................................... am. No. 110, 2000; No. 34, 2003; No. 158, 2006
s 115A............................................. ad No 80, 2015
am No 157, 2018
s. 116............................................... am. No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998; No. 110, 2000
s. 116AAA ...................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Division 2AA
Division 2AA heading .................... rs No 71, 2018
Division 2AA.................................. ad. No. 120, 2004
Subdivision A
s. 116AA......................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
s 116AB .......................................... ad No 120, 2004
am No 154, 2004; No 9, 2006; No 49, 2017; No 71, 2018
s 116ABA ....................................... ad No 71, 2018
Subdivision B
s 116AC .......................................... ad No 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
s 116AD.......................................... ad No 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
s 116AE .......................................... ad No 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
s 116AF........................................... ad No 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am No 71, 2018
Subdivision C
s. 116AG......................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
Subdivision D
s. 116AH......................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
am. No. 154, 2004; No 71, 2018
s. 116AI .......................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
Subdivision E
s. 116AJ .......................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
am No 71, 2018
Division 2A
Division 2A heading....................... rs No 158, 2006
Division 2A..................................... ad No 110, 2000
s. 116A............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
rep. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision A
Subdivision A ................................. ad No 158, 2006
ss. 116AK–116AQ.......................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision B
Subdivision B heading.................... ad No 158, 2006
s. 116B ............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
s. 116C ............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
s 116CA .......................................... ad No 120, 2004
s 116CB .......................................... ad No 120, 2004
s 116D............................................. ad No 110, 2000
am No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Division 3
s 119................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 141, 1994; No 80, 2015
s 120................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 80, 2015
s 122................................................ am No 154, 1980
s 123................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004
s 124................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004
s 125................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 141, 1994
Division 4
Division 4 heading.......................... rs No 78, 1986
s. 126............................................... am. No. 141, 1994
s. 126A............................................ ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 126B ............................................ ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 158, 2006; No 4, 2016
s. 127............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 120, 2004
s. 128............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 120, 2004
s 129................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 141, 1994; No 49, 2017
s. 129A............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 130............................................... am. No. 34, 2003; No. 154, 2004
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 130A............................................ ad. No. 105, 1998
am. No. 158, 2006
ss. 130B, 130C................................ ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 131............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006
Division 4A
Division 4A heading....................... rs. No. 23, 1987
Division 4A..................................... ad No 19, 1979
s. 131A............................................ ad. No. 19, 1979
am No 80, 2015; No 157, 2018
s. 131B ............................................ ad. No. 19, 1979
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am. No. 23, 1987
s. 131C ............................................ ad. No. 23, 1987
s 131D............................................. ad No 34, 2003
am No 13, 2013; No 80, 2015; No 13, 2021
Division 5
s. 132............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 43, 1984; No. 78, 1986; Nos. 104 and 105, 
1998; No. 110, 2000; No. 34, 2003; Nos. 120 and 154, 2004
rep. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision A
Subdiv. A of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
s 132AA.......................................... ad No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
s 132AB .......................................... ad No 158, 2006
Subdivision B
Subdiv. B of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 132AC ......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
am. No. 113, 2008
Subdivision C
Subdiv. C of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
ss. 132AD–132AM......................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision D
Subdiv. D of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
ss. 132AN, 132AO.......................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision E
Subdiv. E of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
ss. 132APA, 132APB ..................... ad. No. 158, 2006
ss. 132APC–132APE...................... ad. No. 158, 2006
am. No. 113, 2008
Subdivision F
Subdiv. F of Div. 5 of Part V.......... ad. No. 158, 2006
ss. 132AQ–132AS .......................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 132AT ......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
am. No. 113, 2008
Subdivision G
Subdiv. G of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 132AU......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 132A............................................ ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 132AAA ...................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 132B ............................................ ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 154, 2004
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 132C ............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision H
Subdiv. H of Div. 5 of Part V ......... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 133............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 91, 1983; No. 78, 1986; Nos. 104 and 105, 
1998; No. 110, 2000
rs. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision I
Subdiv. I of Div. 5 of Part V........... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 133A............................................ ad. No. 43, 1984
am. No. 78, 1986; No. 105, 1998; No. 34, 2003
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 133B ............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
Division 6
s. 134............................................... am. No. 104, 1998; No. 110, 2000; No. 120, 2004; No. 158, 2006
s. 134A............................................ ad. No. 78, 1986
am. No. 149, 1994
Division 7
Division 7 heading.......................... ad No 149, 1994
s 134B ............................................. ad No 149, 1994
am No 104, 1998; No 35, 2012; No 41, 2015; No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 135............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 91, 1976; No. 19, 1979; No. 154, 1980; 
No. 80, 1982; No. 65, 1985; No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 
1993); Nos. 141 and 149, 1994; Nos. 104 and 105, 1998; No. 34, 
2003; No. 158, 2006; No 41, 2015
s. 135AA......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998
rs. No. 158, 2006
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AB ......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998; No 41, 2015
s. 135AC ......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998; No. 35, 2012; No 41, 2015; No 77, 2018
s. 135AD......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998; No. 35, 2012; No 41, 2015
s. 135AE ......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998; No. 35, 2012; No 41, 2015
s 135AEA ....................................... ad No 35, 2012 
am No 41, 2015; No 74, 2023
s. 135AEB....................................... ad. No. 35, 2012 
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AEC....................................... ad. No. 35, 2012 
am No 31, 2014; No 41, 2015
s. 135AED ...................................... ad. No. 35, 2012 
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AF.......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998
rs. No. 35, 2012
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AFA....................................... ad. No. 35, 2012 
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AG......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am. No. 104, 1998; No 41, 2015
s. 135AH......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998; No 41, 2015
s. 135AI .......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998
rs. No. 35, 2012
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AJ .......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998
rs. No. 158, 2006
am No 41, 2015
s. 135AK......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994 
am. No. 104, 1998; No 41, 2015
Part VAA
Part VAA ........................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
rs. No. 158, 2006
Division 1
s. 135AL ......................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 135AM ........................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 135AN......................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 135ANA ...................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
rep. No. 158, 2006
Division 2
Subdivision A
s. 135AOA ...................................... ad. No. 158, 2006 
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Subdivision B
s. 135AOB ...................................... ad. No. 158, 2006 
Subdivision C
ss. 135AOC, 135AOD .................... ad. No. 158, 2006 
Subdivision D
s. 135AOE, 135AOF ...................... ad. No. 158, 2006 
Subdivision E
ss. 135AP–135AR .......................... ad. No. 110, 2000
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 135ARA ...................................... ad. No. 34, 2003
rep. No. 158, 2006
s 135AS........................................... ad No 110, 2000
am No 120, 2004; No 154, 2004
rs No 158, 2006
am No 13, 2013; No 13, 2021
Division 3
Subdivision A
ss. 135ASA–35ASJ ........................ ad. No. 158, 2006 
Subdivision B
s. 135ATA ...................................... ad. No. 158, 2006 
s. 135AT ......................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
rep. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision C
s. 135AU......................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
rs. No. 158, 2006
Part VA heading ............................. rs No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Part VA ........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135A............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
rep No 49, 2017
s 135B ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135C ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 104, 1998
ad No 158, 2006
am No 28, 2007
rep No 49, 2017
s 135D............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
Division 2 heading.......................... rs No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135E ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135F ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135G............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135H............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135J .............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135JAA ........................................ ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135JA ........................................... ad No 110, 2000
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135K............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135KA.......................................... ad No 110, 2000
am No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135L ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006; No 4, 2016
rep No 49, 2017
s 135M ............................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135N............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135P ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135Q............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135R ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135S ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135SA........................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135T ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
rep No 49, 2017
s 135U............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No. 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135V............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135W............................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
ad No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135X............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135Y............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135Z ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998
rs No 110, 2000
am No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZA .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Part VB heading.............................. rs No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Part VB .......................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZB........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 120, 2004
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZC........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZD .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 104, 1998
s 135ZE........................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZF ........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZFA ........................................ ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Division 2 heading.......................... rs No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZGA ....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZG .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZH .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rs No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZJ............................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZK .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rs No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZL........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZM.......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Division 2A..................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZMA....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZMB ....................................... ad No 110, 2000
am No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZMC ....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZMD....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZMDA.................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZME ....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Division 3 heading.......................... rs No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZN .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998
rs No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZP ........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZQ .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Division 4 heading.......................... rs No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZR........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
rs No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZS ........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZT........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZU .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZV .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZW ......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZWAA.................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZWA....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZX .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZXA ....................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZY .......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006; No 4, 2016
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZ........................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 135ZZA........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZB ........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZC ........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZD........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZE ........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZEA ..................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZF......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZG........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 135ZZH........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
Part VC
Part VC .......................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
Division 1
s 135ZZI ......................................... ad No 110, 2000
am No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006; No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 135ZZJ ........................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
s. 135ZZJA ..................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
am. Nos. 8 and 94, 2010; No. 36, 2011
Division 2
ss. 135ZZK–135ZZN...................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
s 135ZZP......................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
am No 4, 2016
s 135ZZQ........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as rep by No 107, 1993); No 110, 2000
am No 4, 2016; No 74, 2023
s 135ZZR ........................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
s 135ZZS......................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
Division 3
ss. 135ZZT–135ZZW ..................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 135ZZWA ................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Division 4
s 135ZZX........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as rep by No 107, 1993); No 110, 2000
am No 49, 2017
s 135ZZY........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as rep by No 107, 1993); No 110, 2000
s 135ZZZ ........................................ ad No 32, 1989 (as rep by No 107, 1993); No 110, 2000
ss. 135ZZZA, 135ZZZB................. ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 110, 2000
Division 5
ss. 135ZZZC–135ZZZE ................. ad. No. 110, 2000
Part VD
Part VD ........................................... ad. No. 94, 2010
Division 1
s 135ZZZF ...................................... ad No 94, 2010
am No 49, 2017
s 135ZZZG ..................................... ad No 94, 2010
s 135ZZZH ..................................... ad No 94, 2010
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Division 2
ss. 135ZZZI–135ZZZN .................. ad. No. 94, 2010
Division 3
ss. 135ZZZO–135ZZZS ................. ad. No. 94, 2010
Division 4
ss. 135ZZZT–135ZZZX ................. ad. No. 94, 2010
Division 5
ss. 135ZZZY, 135ZZZZ ................. ad. No. 94, 2010
s. 135ZZZZA .................................. ad. No. 94, 2010
Part VI
Part VI heading............................... rs No 158, 2006
Division 1
s. 136............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 26, 1982; No. 78, 1986; No. 104, 1998; 
No. 110, 2000; No. 158, 2006
Division 2
s. 138............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
rs. No. 26, 1982 
am. No. 104, 1998; No. 158, 2006
s. 140............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 154, 1980
rs. No. 26, 1982
am. No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998
s. 141............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 26, 1982; No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998
s. 141A............................................ ad. No. 104, 1998
s. 142............................................... am. No. 26, 1982; No. 141, 1994 
rs. No. 104, 1998
s. 143............................................... rs. No. 26, 1982
am. No. 141, 1994
s 144................................................ am No 141, 1994; No 154, 2020
s. 144A............................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 141, 1994; No. 136, 2012
s. 144B ............................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am. No. 26, 1982; No. 141, 1994
s. 145............................................... rs. No. 141, 1994
s. 146............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 26, 1982; No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998
s. 147............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 26, 1982 
Division 3
Division 3 heading.......................... rs. No. 104, 1998
Subdivision A heading.................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
Subdivision A ................................. rep No 49, 2017
s 148................................................ am No 154, 1980
rep No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
ad No 104, 1998
rep No 49, 2017
Subdivision B
Subdivision B heading.................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 149............................................... am. No. 154, 1980 
s 149A............................................. ad No 154, 1980
rs No 78, 1986
am No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 104, 1998
rep No 49, 2017
ss. 150, 151 ..................................... am. No. 154, 1980 
s. 152............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 160, 1977; No. 154, 1980; No. 7, 1983; 
No. 67, 1985; No. 78, 1986; No. 146, 1988; No. 180, 1991; 
No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998; No. 110, 2000; No. 45, 2005; No 
33, 2016
ss. 152A, 152B................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993) 
s. 153............................................... am. No. 154, 1980 
Subdivision C
Subdivision C heading.................... ad No 158, 2006
rs No 49, 2017
Subdivision C ................................. rs No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 153A............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000
rs No 49, 2017
s 153B ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BAAA .................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BA .......................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BAA ....................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BAB ....................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BAC ....................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BAD ....................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
Subdivision D heading.................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153BB .......................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 153C ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993) 
am No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 34, 2003
rep No 49, 2017
s 153D............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
rep No 49, 2017
s 153DAA ....................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153DA.......................................... ad No 110, 2000
rep No 49, 2017
s 153DB .......................................... ad No 158, 2006
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
rep No 49, 2017
s 153DC .......................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153DD.......................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 153DE .......................................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
Subdivision E
Subdivision E heading .................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s 153DF........................................... ad No 49, 2017
s. 153E ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as rep. by No. 107, 1993); No. 104, 1998
ss. 153F, 153G................................ ad. No. 104, 1998
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 153H............................................ ad. No. 104, 1998
s. 153J ............................................. ad. No. 104, 1998
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 153K............................................ ad. No. 104, 1998
s. 153KA......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision F heading .................... ad No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
Subdivision F.................................. rep No 49, 2017
s 153L ............................................. ad No 104, 1998
rep No 49, 2017
Subdivision G
Subdivision G heading.................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 153M ........................................... ad. No. 110, 2000
am. No. 158, 2006
s. 153N............................................ ad. No. 110, 2000
ss. 153P–153R ................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision GA
Subdivision GA .............................. ad. No. 94, 2010
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 153RA ......................................... ad. No. 94, 2010
ss. 153S–153W ............................... ad. No. 94, 2010
Subdivision H
Subdivision H heading.................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 154............................................... am. No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006 
ss. 155, 156 ..................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006
s. 157............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006
ss. 157A, 157B................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 158............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
s. 159............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006
ss. 159A, 159B................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 91, 1983
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993) 
Subdivision I
Subdivision I heading ..................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 161............................................... am. No. 19, 1979; No. 154, 1980; No. 104, 1998
Division 4
s. 163A............................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 141, 1994 
s. 166............................................... am. No. 19, 1979; No. 154, 1980; No. 104, 1998
s. 167............................................... am. No. 104, 1998; No. 158, 2006
s. 168............................................... am. No. 158, 2006
s. 169............................................... am. No. 216, 1973
Division 4A
Division 4A..................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 169A............................................ ad No. 158, 2006
s. 169B ............................................ ad No. 158, 2006
am No 24, 2016
s. 169C ............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 169D............................................ ad No. 158, 2006
s. 169E ............................................ ad No. 158, 2006
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 169F ............................................ ad No. 158, 2006
s. 169G............................................ ad No. 158, 2006
Division 5
s. 170............................................... am. No. 146, 1999
rs. No. 158, 2006
am. No. 46, 2011
s. 170A............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 171............................................... am. No. 141, 1994; No. 158, 2006 
s. 172............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994; No. 24, 2001 
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 173............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994 
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 174............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 78, 1986; No. 104, 1998; No. 158, 2006
s. 175............................................... am. No. 158, 2006
Part VII
Division 1 heading.......................... ad. No. 104, 1998
Division 1
s 180................................................ am No 154, 1980
rs No 49, 2017
s 181................................................ am No 154, 1980
rep No 49, 2017
s. 182A............................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 141, 1994
Division 2
Division 2 ....................................... ad. No. 104, 1998
s 182B ............................................. ad No 104, 1998
am No 13, 2017; No 154, 2020
s 182C ............................................. ad No 104, 1998
s 183................................................ am No 19, 1979; No 154, 1980; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 
1993); No 141, 1994; No 110, 2000; No 13, 2017; No 49, 2017
s 183A............................................. ad. No. 104, 1998
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 183B ............................................. ad No 104, 1998
s 183C ............................................. ad No 104, 1998
s 183D............................................. ad No 104, 1998
am No 49, 2017
s 183E ............................................. ad No 104, 1998
am No 49, 2017
s. 183F ............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
Part VIII
Division 1
Division 1 heading.......................... ad No 49, 2017
s 184................................................ am No 160, 1977; No 154, 1980; No 7, 1983; No 78, 1986; 
No 146, 1988; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 180, 
1991; No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000; No 45, 2005; No 73, 2008; No 
49, 2017
s 185................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 49, 2017
Division 2
Division 2 heading.......................... ad No 49, 2017
s 186................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 49, 2017
s 187................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004; No 49, 2017
s 188................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004; No 49, 2017
s 188A............................................. ad No 49, 2017
Part IX
Part IX heading............................... rs. No. 120, 2004
Part IX ............................................ rs. No. 159, 2000
Division 1
s 189................................................ rs No. 159, 2000
am No. 159, 2000; No 120, 2004
ed C62
s. 190............................................... rs. No. 159, 2000
s. 191............................................... am. No. 141, 1994
rs. No. 159, 2000
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
ss. 191A, 191B................................ ad. No. 120, 2004
s. 192............................................... am. No. 141, 1994
rs. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
Division 2
s. 193............................................... rs. No. 159, 2000
s. 194............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
rs. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 159, 2000
s. 195............................................... rs. No. 159, 2000
s. 195AA......................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
rs. No. 159, 2000
s. 195AB ......................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Division 2A
Division 2A..................................... ad No 120, 2004
ss. 195ABA–195ABE..................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Division 3
s. 195AC ......................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
ss. 195AD–195AF .......................... ad. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 159, 2000
ss. 195AG, 195AH.......................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Division 3A
Division 3A..................................... ad No 120, 2004
ss. 195AHA–195AHC .................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Division 4
ss. 195AI–195AL............................ ad. No. 159, 2000
Division 4A
Division 4A..................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
ss. 195ALA, 195ALB..................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Division 5
Subdivision A
Subdivision A heading.................... ad No 120, 2004
s 195AM ......................................... ad No 159, 2000
am No 120, 2004
s 195AN.......................................... ad No 159, 2000
am No 120, 2004
Subdivision B
Subdivision B ................................. ad No 120, 2004
ss. 195ANA, 195ANB .................... ad No 120, 2004
Division 6
Subdivision A
Subdivision A heading.................... ad No 120, 2004
ss. 195AO, 195AP .......................... ad No 159, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AQ......................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 159, 2000; No. 120, 2004
ss. 195AR–195AV.......................... ad. No. 159, 2000
ss. 195AVA, 195AVB .................... ad. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AW ........................................ ad. No. 159, 2000
ss. 195AWA, 195AWB .................. ad. No. 159, 2000
s. 195AX......................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Subdivision B
Subdivision B ................................. ad No 120, 2004
ss. 195AXA–195AXL .................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Division 7
Subdivision A
Subdivision A heading.................... ad No 120, 2004
s. 195AY......................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 120, 2004
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
Heading to s. 195AZ....................... am. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AZ ......................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Heading to s. 195AZA.................... am. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AZA ...................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
s. 195AZB....................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
rep. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AZC....................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
am. No. 34, 2003
rep. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AZD ...................................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Heading to s. 195AZE .................... am. No. 120, 2004
ss. 195AZE–195AZG ..................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Subdivision B
Subdivision B ................................. ad No 120, 2004
ss. 195AZGA–195AZGF................ ad. No. 120, 2004
Subdivision C
Subdivision C ................................. ad. No. 120, 2004
s. 195AZGG.................................... ad. No. 120, 2004
s 195AZGH..................................... ad No 120, 2004
am No 13, 2013; No 13, 2021
Division 8
Subdivision A
Subdivision A heading.................... ad. No. 120, 2004
ss. 195AZH–195AZO..................... ad. No. 159, 2000
Subdivision B
Subdivision B ................................. ad. No. 120, 2004
ss. 195AZP–195AZR...................... ad. No. 120, 2004
Part X
Division 1
Division 1 heading.......................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195A............................................. ad No 154, 1980
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 
1993); No 104, 1998; No 158, 2006; No 49, 2017
Division 2
Division 2 heading.......................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195B ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as rep by No 107, 1993); No 107, 1993
am No 149, 1994; No 104, 1998; No 158, 2006; No 94, 2010; 
No 35, 2012; No 41, 2015; No 49, 2017; No 38, 2024
Division 3
Division 3 ....................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CA .......................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CB .......................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CC .......................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CD .......................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CE........................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CF........................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CG .......................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CH .......................................... ad No 113, 2015
s 195CI............................................ ad No 113, 2015
s 195CJ ........................................... ad No 113, 2015
Division 4
Division 4 heading.......................... ad No 113, 2015
ss. 197, 198 ..................................... am. No. 141, 1994 
s. 198A............................................ ad. No. 34, 2003
am. No. 34, 2003
rep No 77, 2018
s. 199............................................... am. No. 160, 1977; No. 154, 1980; No. 7, 1983; No. 78, 1986; 
No. 146, 1988; No. 180, 1991; No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998; 
No. 110, 2000; No. 45, 2005
s 200................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993); No 49, 
2017
s. 200AAA ...................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
am. No. 8, 2010
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 200AA.......................................... ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 104, 1998
rep No 49, 2017
s 200AB .......................................... ad No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
s. 200A............................................ ad. No. 78, 1986
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s. 201............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
rep No 113, 2015
s. 202............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 141, 1994; No. 104, 1998; No. 158, 2006
s. 202A............................................ ad. No. 158, 2006
s 203A............................................. ad No 154, 1980
am No 91, 1983; No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am 
by No 107, 1993)
rs No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
ss. 203B, 203C................................ ad. No. 154, 1980
am. No. 165, 1984; No. 78, 1986
rep. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s 203D............................................. ad No 154, 1980
am No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 
1993)
rs No 158, 2006
rep No 49, 2017
s 203E ............................................. ad No 154, 1980
am No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 
1993); No 141, 1994; No 24, 2001; No 158, 2006; No 49, 2017
s 203F ............................................. ad No 154, 1980
am No 91, 1983; No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am 
by No 107, 1993); No 24, 2001
rs No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 203G............................................. ad No 154, 1980
am No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986
rep No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
ad No 110, 2000
rs No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
s 203H............................................. ad No 154, 1980
am No 165, 1984; No 78, 1986; No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 
1993); No 110, 2000; No 158, 2006; No 49, 2017
Part XI
Division 1
s. 204............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s. 206............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 61, 1981
s. 208............................................... am. No. 120, 2004
s. 209............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
Division 2
s. 210............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s 211................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 141, 1994; No 115, 2024
s. 212............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 120, 2004
s. 213............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
ss. 214–216 ..................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s. 217............................................... am. No. 216, 1973; No. 154, 1980
s. 219............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
Division 3
s 220................................................ am No 154, 1980; No 120, 2004; No 115, 2024
ss. 221–225 ..................................... am. No. 154, 1980
Division 4
ss. 226, 227 ..................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s. 229............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s 232................................................ am. No. 154, 1980
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 233................................................ am No 154, 1980
rep No 49, 2017
s 234................................................ am No 154, 1980
rep No 49, 2017
s 235................................................ am No 154, 1980
rs No 49, 2017
s 236................................................ am No 154, 1980
s 237................................................ am No 154, 1980
s. 238............................................... am. No. 154, 1980
rep. No. 159, 2000
s. 239............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
s 240................................................ am No 154, 1980
s 241................................................ am No 154, 1980
rep No 113, 2015
Division 5
ss. 244, 245 ..................................... am. No. 154, 1980
s. 246............................................... am. No. 110, 2000
s. 248............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 141, 1994
Part XIA
Part XIA.......................................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
Division 1
s 248A............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 149, 1994; No 104, 1998; No 110, 2000 (as am by No 63, 
2002); No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006; No 21, 2007; No 49, 2017
s. 248B ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 120, 2004
s 248C ............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 120, 2004; No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
s. 248CA ......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994
am. No. 158, 2006
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s. 248D............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
rs. No. 120, 2004
s. 248E ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
rep. No. 110, 2000
s. 248F ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 149, 1994; No. 158, 2006
Division 2
s. 248G............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 149, 1994; No. 110, 2000; No. 120, 2004; No 49, 2017
s. 248H............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 113, 2008
s. 248J ............................................. ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 120, 2004
ss. 248K–248M............................... ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
s 248MA ......................................... ad No. 34, 2003
am No. 13, 2013; No 13, 2021
s. 248N............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
Division 3
Subdivision A
Subdivision A ................................. ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 248P ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 105, 1998; No. 110, 2000; No. 120, 2004
rs. No. 158, 2006
s 248PA........................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s 248PB........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PC........................................... ad No 158, 2006
am No 49, 2017
s 248PD........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PE ........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PF ........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PG........................................... ad No 158, 2006
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
s 248PH........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PI ............................................ ad No 158, 2006
s 248PJ............................................ ad No 158, 2006
s 248PK........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PL ........................................... ad No 158, 2006
s 248PM.......................................... ad No 158, 2006
Subdivision B
Subdivision B ................................. ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 248Q............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 149, 1994; No. 105, 1998
rep. No. 158, 2006
s. 248QA......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994
am. No. 105, 1998
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 248QB ......................................... ad. No. 149, 1994
rs. No. 105, 1998; No. 158, 2006
ss. 248QC–248QH.......................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision C
Subdivision C ................................. ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 248R ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
am. No. 149, 1994
rep. No. 105, 1998
ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 248S ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
rs. No. 158, 2006
s. 248SA.......................................... ad. No. 158, 2006
Subdivision D
Subdivision D heading.................... ad. No. 158, 2006
s. 248T ............................................ ad. No. 32, 1989 (as am. by No. 107, 1993)
Division 4
s 248U............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
Endnotes
Endnote 4—Amendment history
Provision affected How affected
am No 120, 2004; No 49, 2017
s 248V............................................. ad No 32, 1989 (as am by No 107, 1993)
am No 120, 2004; No 49, 2017
Part XII
s. 249............................................... am. No. 154, 1980; No. 158, 2006; No 126, 2015
The Schedule
The Schedule .................................. am No 115, 2024