Corporate Power

Our style of life is largely determined by the activities and style of
business; and the style of business is largely determined by the activities
and style of our companies.

Confederation of British Industry, 1973.'

The purpose of this chapter is to describe some of the ways in which
companies exercise power and to examine the relevance of the possession of
power to the concerns, or what should be the concerns, of company law. The
chapter will cover the following ground. It will begin with a brief survey of
the corporate economy. This will provide a background for the consideration
of the nature and scope of corporate power? that will follow in section II.
Section III will support the claim that the possession of power by companies
is justifiable only in so far as they promote the public interest, and accordingly
that society is entitled to demand that corporate policies serve that interest.
The claim will be defended in particular against the argument that the
company should be seen as a private vehicle which may legitimately be
employed for the exclusive pursuit of the purposes of its members. The final
section will set out a provisional theory explaining how companies best
further the public interest and the implications of that theory for company
law.

I THE CORPORATE ECONOMY

The next section will examine in more detail what is meant by ‘corporate
power’, and the different areas in which it has an impact. The purpose of the
present section is to bring to mind the shape and scale of the corporate
economy in which this power is located. The possession of power by

' Confederation of British Industry, The Responsibilities of the British Public Company (1973),
at 8.

? ‘Throughout this chapter the term ‘corporate power’ will be used without enquiring who
within (or outside) the firm actually possesses it. Some light will be shed on this issue in Ch. 2,
where the arguments about the effectiveness of shareholder control over management and
(briefly) problems of top management control over lower levels within the organization will be
considered.

Corporate Power and Responsibility. J. E. Parkinson.
© Oxford University Press 1993. Published 1993 by Oxford University Press.

9Z0Z YEW 90 UO Jesn Ayeqiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Je}deYo// /ez/4OOq/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyY Woy pepeojumog
4 Corporate Power

companies is principally an attribute of size, and so the companies with
which this book is concerned are large, in absolute terms and usually also in
relation to the industry or industries in which they operate. There is,
however, no need for a precise definition of ‘large’ since nothing turns on any
particular size threshold being crossed. The companies we shall be discussing
are public companies with publicly listed shares. (There is also a small
number of very large companies that are private.) They often have a broad
product range, operating in more than one industrial sector, and they
sometimes show a high degree of vertical integration, having control of their
sources of supply at one end and the chain of distribution at the other. They
have professional management and normally a complex organizational
structure. For convenience these enterprises will mainly be discussed as
though they were single companies, though in fact they are normally
composed of a parent company and several layers of subsidiaries. In many
cases some of these subsidiaries are based overseas. Conversely, a significant
proportion of the companies operating in this country are offshoots of
enterprises whose head offices are situated abroad.

Large companies constitute a very small proportion of the total population
of firms (‘firm’ refers to all forms of business organization, not only those
that are incorporated). In manufacturing, for example, firms with fewer than
100 employees accounted for 95 per cent of all firms in 1981. As far as
companies are concerned, in 1gg2 there were well over 1 million on the
register in Great Britain, but of these only a little more than 1 per cent were
public companies.* But while large companies are only a small percentage of
total businesses, they dominate the economy, such that ‘a large proportion of
economic activity in present-day capitalist economies is concentrated in a
relatively small number of absolutely large firms’.> As Hannah points out in
his historical study of the development of the corporate economy, during the
course of the present century British industry was transformed from ‘a
disaggregated structure of predominantly small, competing firms to a con-
centrated structure dominated by large, and often monopolistic, corpora-
tions’. This transformation came about as companies expanded to take
advantage of mass-production methods and associated economies of scale
and integration, and also as they strove to limit the competitive forces to
which they were subject. Some of this expansion was through organic
growth, but the increase in concentration is mainly accounted for by a series
of merger waves beginning towards the end of the nineteenth century.’

3 P, J. Devine, et al. Introduction to Industrial Economics (4th ed., 1985), at 86. This is calculated
from the 1981 Census of Production, as are the other figures quoted below in relation to 1981.

* DTI, Companies in 1991-92 (1992).

5 Devine et al., Introduction to Industrial Economics (above, n. 3), at 85.

6 L. Hannah, The Rise of the Corporate Economy (and ed., 1983), at I.

7 See L. Hannah and J. Kay, Concentration in Modern Industry (1977), ch. 1 and generally, and

9Z0Z Yue QO UO Jesn Ayeiqi ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Jo}deYU9/2 /Ez/4OOG/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyYy Woy papeojumog
Corporate Power 5

Large absolute size was in turn facilitated by improvements in financing and
management techniques and developments in organizational structure.®

To gain an impression of the size of individual enterprises on a global
scale, the world’s ten largest companies (by number of employees) employ a
total of 4.3 million, and it has been estimated that when the dependants of
those employees are taken into account the welfare of up to 21 million
people, a figure approaching the population of the Scandinavian countries, is
directly affected by their decisions. In 1989 their assets totalled US $560
billion, equivalent to the GNP of Canada.® As regards the UK, in 1985, 165
companies in the UK employed over 10,000 people, 36 over 50,000, and 11
over 100,000.'° A composite picture of the position of large companies within
the economy is presented in a study of statistics relating to the ‘top 100’
manufacturing companies published by the Department of Industry in 1976.
This reveals that these companies accounted for about 40 per cent of
manufacturing industry’s net assets, employment, and inward direct invest-
ment from overseas (excluding oil company investment), 40-50 per cent of
visible exports, 70 per cent of expenditure on industrial scientific research
and development, and about 75 per cent of direct investment by UK
companies (excluding oil) in manufacturing overseas.'' In the same vein, the
Bullock Committee in 1977 noted that the ‘last 20 years have seen the
growth of the giant industrial enterprise and the concentration of economic
power in the hands of fewer and fewer such companies. For example, in 1953
the 100 largest manufacturing enterprises in the UK accounted for 25 per
cent of the total net output; in 1971 the corresponding figure was 40 per
cent’.’? By 1981 328 companies accounted for over 50 per cent of manufactur-
ing employment, and a mere 66 companies for 30 per cent.’? Changes in the
structure of British industry, including the contraction of the manufacturing

S. J. Prais, The Evolution of Giant Firms in Britain (1976). For a brief history of merger activity in
the UK see also J. Fairburn and J. Kay (eds), Mergers and Merger Policy (1989), at 2-8.

® Particularly the transition from the U-form to the M-form enterprise: see Ch. 2, below.
More fundamentally, there is a substantial literature explaining the movement towards coordina-
tion of productive activity within hierarchical organizations, rather than through discrete
transactions in the market, in terms of transaction cost reduction: see R. H. Coase, ‘The Nature
of the Firm’, (1937) ns 4 Economica 386; A. D. Chandler, The Visible Hand: The Managerial
Revolution in American Business (1977), at 6-8; O. E. Williamson, Economic Institutions of Capitalism
(1985); R. A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (3rd ed., 1986), at 367-8; O. Hart, ‘An
Economist’s Perspective on the Theory of the Firm’, (1989) 89 Colum L Rev 1757. For
commentaries see D. A. Hay and D. J. Morris, Jndustrial Economics and Organization: Theory and
kurdence (1991), at 281-285; M. C. Sawyer, The Economics of Industries and Firms (2nd ed., 1985),
at 198-204.

® See A. Demb and F.-F. Neubauer, The Corporate Board: Confronting the Paradoxes (1992), at 3.

'0 Hay and Morris, /ndustrial Economics and Organization (above, n. 8), at 273-4.

'' Department of Industry, “The Importance of the Top too Manufacturing Companies’,
Economic Trends no. 274 (1976), at 85-8.

'2 Report of the Committee of Inquiry on Industrial Democracy (Cmnd. 6706, 1977), at 20, para 2.

'§ DTI, ‘Report on the Census of Production 1981’, Summary Tables, Business Monitor PA
1002 (1984), at 258.

9Z0Z YOUe 90 UO Jesn Ayeiqi ON Aq 9O09PSSZPL/Je}deYD/2 /Ez/4OOqG/WON dno‘slWepese//:sdyY WO pepeojuMoG
6 Corporate Power

base over the last decade, seem to have done little to reduce overall
concentration. Peacock and Bannock point out that while there was a slight
fall in manufacturing concentration between 1970 and 1988, it is likely that
this trend has since been reversed in view of the recent merger boom.'* They
also point out that the quoted company sector is becoming more concentrated
in terms of market capitalization, the share of the 100 largest companies
having risen from 65.2 per cent in 1984 to 67.3 per cent in 1990."°

Within the set of large companies there is a tendency towards dominance
by the very largest. Thus in 1982 the top 100 quoted companies accounted
for well over half the turnover, profit, and capital employed of the top 1000
companies, and within the top 100, the top ten accounted for over a quarter
of turnover and capital.'® The figures for concentration overall indicate the
degree of centralization of decision-making in the economy as a whole. The
level of concentration within a particular industry casts light on the
competitiveness of the industry and hence on the scope for the exploitation of
economic power (though the globalization of business and difficulties in
specifying product markets, given the availability of substitutes, make the
figures an uncertain guide). It is clear that in a number of sectors
concentration is significantly higher than in the economy generally. The
share of total output of the five largest companies in chemicals, vehicles,
electrical engineering, and drink, for example, average around 70 per cent.”
Large parts of the service sector, which now contributes a higher proportion
of GDP than manufacturing industry, are similarly characterized by high
concentration ratios. Retail banking, insurance, property, shipping, com-
munications, and retailing, for example, are all dominated by a small
number of giant enterprises.'®

Corporate power is not merely a matter of the resources and market share
of formally independent entities. It also results from coordinated activity
between companies. As Herman explains,

Collective action may result from structural tics between firms that integrate their
interest and facilitate coordination between them—such as a common ownership
interest—or it may arise out of a recognized common interest or mutual business
interdependence with minimal personal contact and communications among the

4 See A. Peacock and J. Bannock, Corporate Takeovers and the Public Interest (1991), at 24. They
explain that while spin-offs accompanied the 1980s merger boom, it is likely that a large
proportion of them involved sales of subsidiaries between large groups. This is liable to increase
concentration rather than reduce it, i.e. where diversified groups dispose of unrelated activities
to companies which already have a high market share in the relevant sector.

' Tbid. at 25.

6 R. I. Tricker, Corporate Governance: Practices, Procedures and Powers in British Compantes and their
Boards of Directors (1984), at 47.

'7 Hannah, The Rise of the Corporate Economy (above, n. 6), at 144. See also Hannah and Kay,
Concentration in Modern Industry (above, n. 7), ch. 6.

'8 1. F. Channon, ‘Corporate Evolution in the Service Industries’, in L. Hannah (ed.),
Management Strategy and Business Development (1976).

9Z0Z Yue QO UO Jesn Ayeiqi ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Jo}deYU9/2 /Ez/4OOG/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyYy Woy papeojumog
Corporate Power 7

companies and their officials. In between these extremes is a wide spectrum of
linkages, such as interlocking directorates; common membership in trade associations,
government advisory bodies, and public affairs groups; and personal connections of
officials through clubs and other social bases of contact.'®

All of these relationships are integral features of the British economy,”
though assessing their practical significance in terms of reduced competition
or the pursuit of common purposes is far from straightforward.

It is important to note finally the international character of corporate
enterprise. As regards the presence of outposts of overseas companies in this
country, it has been observed that though ‘the British economy is not
dominated by foreign investment, the foreign presence in Britain is highly
visible and statistically important. Roughly one in seven of British workers
work in foreign companies, which [incidentally] tend to be more efficient
than their British competitors’.?! Conversely, most of the 100 largest UK
companies also operate abroad. A significant feature is that for many of these
companies their overseas activities are more important than their domestic
ones. It has been pointed out, for instance, that in 1983 the largest 70 British
manufacturing multinationals had a foreign output of around £100 billion,
whereas their home production was £70 billion.”? As compared with foreign
multinationals, for British multinationals a notably higher proportion of
production and employment is located overseas.”

While the parent company in a multinational group will necessarily be
registered in a particular country and the group headquarters and a
preponderance of shareholders may also be located there, in the case of some
multinationals it is scarcely any longer appropriate to regard them as having
national loyalties. ‘Thus it has been suggested that

although we think of IBM and General Motors as American, and Unilever and Shell
as British (or, more exactly, Anglo-Dutch), firms as large and diverse as these plan
their operations on a global scale in their own interests. In terms of sheer size they are
sometimes bigger than the countries in which they operate; they are estimated to
control over a quarter of world output; and their ‘inter-firm’ shipments of goods from
one country to another account for nearly one-third of recorded trade.”

Clearly, controlling such organizations is beyond the regulatory capacity
of national governments. Attempts to regulate the global activities of

'9 E, 8. Herman, Corporate Control, Corporate Power (1981), at 194-5.

0 E.g. on interlocking directorships see J. Scott, Corporations, Classes and Capitalism (and ed.,
1985), at 95-102.

1 J. M. Stopford and L. M. Turner, Britain and the Multinationals (1985), at 4-5. See also
ch. 6.

22 Ibid, at 3.

3 See H. Ramsay, 1992 -—- The Year of the Multinational? Corporate Behaviour, Industrial Restructur-
ing and Labour in the Single Market, Warwick International Papers no 35 (1990), at 3.

* P. Donaldson and J. Farquhar, Understanding the British Economy (1988), at 162.

9Z0Z YONeV\| 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WON dno‘olWwapede//:Sdy}y WO. papeojuMog
8 Corporate Power

multinationals, particularly in relation to employment and developmental
issues in the Third World, have evoked an intergovernmental and ‘world-
organizational’ response.”® A consideration of the form and effectiveness of
this response falls outside the scope of this book, but it should be emphasized
that the international context in which large companies operate is of central
importance to the control of companies domestically, which is the concern
here. The ability of enterprises to transfer investment from countries in
which the regulatory environment threatens to become uncongenial, and the
damage to international competitiveness that may result if domestic industry
is subject to a more stringent regulatory regime than rival firms abroad, are
liable to circumscribe severely the capacity of national governments to
establish an appropriate control framework. Purely national solutions to
problems of corporate control are likely, therefore, to be unavailing.

Il THE NATURE OF CORPORATE POWER

Power is a contested concept. For our purposes there is no need to explore all
the different conceptions of it, though some of them will emerge during the
course of the discussion.”© A widely accepted understanding of power is that
it is the ability of A to cause B to behave in a manner intended by A that B
would not have done without A’s intervention. Implicit is the idea that A
has some form of control over B, or at least a strong bargaining position that
enables A to score a ‘victory’ over B.?”7 Companies sometimes have power of
this kind over suppliers, as might be the case when the company is one of only
a limited number of buyers of a firm’s goods or services, and even to an
extent over governments, manifested, for example, in negotiations over
subsidies or in successful attempts to dilute the content of regulation. (We
will return to the issue of corporate influence over government below.)

The context in which power in this sense most conspicuously occurs,
however, is in regard to employees. Companies may have power in setting
the terms of the employment relationship arising from a possible asymmetry
in bargaining positions, but they also possess power within the relationship.
Indeed, the position of authority in which the company stands towards its

28 For a brief summary of attempts to regulate multinationals at a supra-national level see F.
P. McHugh, Business Ethics (1988), at 43-8; T. Donaldson, The Ethics of International Business
(1989), ch. 3.

2° For an examination of the different conceptions of power see S. Lukes, ‘Power and
Authority’, in T. Bottomore and R. Nisbet (eds), A History of Sociological Analysis (1979),
reprinted in S. Lukes, Moral Conflict and Politics (1991), ch. 6.

27 G. K. Wilson, Business and Politics: A Comparative Introduction (and ed., 1990), at 6.

#8 P, Davies and P. Kelly, Small Firms and the Manufacturing Sector: Bolton Committee Research
Report, no. 3 (1971), report that over a third of small manufacturing enterprises sell a quarter or
more of their output to a single customer.

9Z0Z Ye 90 UO Jesn Ayesqr] ON Aq 909PSSZrL/e}deYyo///€7/4O0q/Wod'dno'oiwepeoes/:sdyy Woy pepeojumog
Corporate Power 9

employees is a central feature of the standard definition of the firm. According
to Coase, firms are ‘islands of conscious power’ in a sea of market transac-
tions.”? This idea of an authority relation, giving the employer a special
power of direction over employees not found between parties transacting in
the market, has, however, been disputed, notably by Alchian and Demsetz,
who argue that the employer/employee relationship does not differ in
substance from any other relationship founded in contract.2° An employer
has no more power to give orders to an employee than a customer has to
demand that a grocer supply goods at a certain price: all a discontented
employer can do in practice, just like a customer, is terminate the relation-
ship. In neither case is there any additional disciplinary power with which
employers or customers are able to impose their will. From this perspective,
therefore, employers do not have power over employees; they do not give
them instructions, but rather are involved in a process of constant renegotia-
tion of the employment contract.*’ But this is surely to misdescribe the social
reality of the employment relationship. Dismissal imposes costs on the
employee, in terms of lost income, severance of social relationships at work,
and the inconvenience involved in finding another job, that the employee
will wish to avoid and which have no equivalents when relationships between
customers and grocers break down. And in periods of high unemployment,
and especially in areas or occupations in which the current employer is in a
dominant position, the threat of discharge is a potent weapon. The attempt
to assimilate the employment relationship to one of continuous contractual
renegotiation is therefore unconvincing.”

Decision-Making Power

The possession of power over employees is not unique to large companies
(though as just mentioned, size may create a position of dominance and

29 Coase, ‘The Nature of the Firm’ (above, n. 8).

*° A. Alchian and H. Demsetz, ‘Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization’
(1972) 62 Am Econ Rev 777. The idea that employers have no coercive power over employecs is a
common theme in market liberal literature: see e.g. F. A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty
(1960), at 135-7.

1 Alchian and Demsetz, ibid. at 777-78, contend that ‘[t]o speak of managing, directing, or
assigning workers to various tasks is a deceptive way of noting that the employer continually is
involved in renegotiation of contracts on terms that must be acceptable to both parties. Telling
an employce to type this letter rather than to file that document is like telling my grocer to sell
me this brand of tuna rather than that brand of bread’. This analysis is not legally correct. The
employer is entitled to give instructions within the scope of the employment contract. It may be
true that employers are unlikely to sue for damages where their orders are not carried out, and
therefore that since the only effective sanction is dismissal, each ‘instruction’ can be counted as a
contractual renegotiation (the employee has the option of accepting or leaving). As argued in
the text, however, this does not correspond with the realities of the situation.

2 See also R. A. Dahl, A Preface to Economic Democracy (1985), at 113-16; C. Perrow, Complex
Organizations; A Critical Essay (3rd ed., 1986), at 226-7.

9Z0Z YOUe 90 UO Jesn Ayeiqi ON Aq 9O09PSSZPL/Je}deYD/2 /Ez/4OOqG/WON dno‘slWepese//:sdyY WO pepeojuMoG
10 Corporate Power

hence accentuate power), but rather is inherent in the employment relation-
ship itself. We turn now to a type of power that is more specifically an
attribute of large companies, and which is our central concern. This is power
in the sense of decision-making power. Power of this kind can be defined as ‘the
scope of significant choice open to [an actor]... his power over others is the
scope of his choices which affect them significantly’.*? It 1s distinguishable
from power in the sense just discussed (though the two forms may exist side
by side) in that it does not rely on any idea of direct control over others or
coercion. The key elements are instead discretion and significant effects.** The
point at issue is, then, that companies are able to make choices which have
important social consequences: they make private decisions which have
public results.*° It is possession of this kind of power that gives rise to a
distinct need for justification, and which forms the basis for the claim that
companies must be required to act in the public interest. We should note
that in recognising that companies have power, it is not suggested that their
power is anything like absolute. Corporate decision making is constrained by
governments, unions, customers, other companies, and community pressures
of both diffuse and organized kinds. These constraints limit and shape
corporate power, but the discretion that lies within them, although variable,
is nevertheless real.

Power and the Market

In the economist’s model of perfect competition firms have no capacity to
exercise significant choice: they have no option but to obey the signals of the
market. It is because markets are not perfect in reality that companies have
power, though in adopting this perspective it is important to guard against
the tendency to view divergences from the model as temporary and aberrant
rather than as a standard feature of market systems. In the perfect competi-
tion model the number of producers is sufficiently large that all firms are

33 C, Kaysen, “The Corporation: How Much Power? What Scope?’, in E, S. Mason (ed.), The
Corporation in Modern Society (1959), at 85.

3 For a consideration of what constitutes affecting someone ‘significantly’ such as to denote
the existence of power, sce S. Lukes, Power: A Radical View (1974), esp. chs 5 and 6, For some
other discussions of corporate power along similar lines to those in the text, see A. A, Berle,
Power without Property (1960), esp. at 82~7; R. Nader, M. Green, and G. Seligman, Taming the
Giant Corporation (1976), ch. 1; G. A. Steiner and J. F. Steiner, Buszness, Government, and Society: A
Managerial Perspective (3rd ed., 1980), ch. 9.

35 See c.g. J. K. Galbraith, ‘On the Economic Image of Corporate Enterprise’, in R. Nader
and M. Green (eds), Corporate Power in America (1973), at 6:

Gencral Motors sets the prices for its cars (and, in conjunction with the other automobile

companies, for all cars) with public effect. And it negotiates wage contracts with public effect.

And it designs cars and incorporates or rejects safety features with public effect. And it decides

on engine design and emissions with public effect. And it persuades the public to its designs

with public effect. And it powerfully influences highway construction with public effect. The
public decisions of General Motors in the course of any year are far more consequential than
those of any state legislature. So with other large firms.

9Z0Z Yue QO UO Jesn Ayeiqi ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Jo}deYU9/2 /Ez/4OOG/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyYy Woy papeojumog
Corporate Power ll

‘price-takers’. A firm cannot, in other words, charge more for its goods than
the current market price. Because firms have no discretion over prices but
must passively accept the price prevailing in the market they have no
‘market power’. They can make profits only at the level that justifies the
continued employment of their assets in their existing use and are unable to
effect a transfer of wealth from customers to themselves. Competitive condi-
tions also ensure that firms have no discretion over the quality of goods
supplied, since failure to match the quality or provide the features demanded
by the market (the model assumes that market participants possess full
product information and knowlege of alternative opportunities)** would
mean that a firm would lose all its business to competitors. Further-
more, since all firms are bound by an exogenously determined price, a
firm with production costs higher than those of rivals would not survive.
This, together with perfectly competitive markets for labour and other
inputs and the assumption that all firms are fully informed about the most
profitable factor combinations, has the effect that discretion over production
methods is also ruled out. Where the requirements of the model are satisfied
it can thus with some truth be said that there is an ‘utter dispersion of
power’.?’

In reality many companies operate in conditions which are to a greater or
lesser extent uncompetitive. Although technical monopoly may be a rarity,
markets are commonly dominated by a small number of large producers.**
In such circumstances by colluding or in virtue of the structural properties of
oligopolistic markets, companies are able to obtain variable degrees of
protection from competitive pressures.*° In addition to the relatively small
number of producers, other requirements for perfect competition are also
unlikely to be met in practice. Thus an uncompetitive market structure may
be maintained indefinitely because of barriers to entry and exit; products are
not, as in the model, homogeneous, but have differentiating characteristics
which enable producers to raise prices without causing a total shift in
demand to their rivals; and finally, purchasers lack perfect information and
hence may pay higher prices than they would if aware of alternative,

46 Tf the perfect knowledge assumption is dropped, then in certain circumstances market
forces in a competitive market will ‘impose a regime of misrepresentation and degradation of
product quality’: see W. J. Baumol, ‘(Almost) Perfect Competition (Contestability) and Business
Ethics’, in W. J. Baumol and S. A. B. Blackman (eds), Perfect Markets and Easy Virtue: Business
Ethics and the Invisible Hand (1991), 1, at 7 (emphasis omitted); i.e. the market will still climinate
producer discretion, but in a way unfavourable to customers.

37 G. J. Stigler, ‘Competition’, (1968) 3 International Encyclopedia of Social Science 181, quoted in
A. Etzioni, The Moral Dimension: Toward a New Economics (1988), at 218.

*® For a consideration of the extent of market power in the British economy see J. Fairburn
and P. Geroski, “The Empirical Analysis of Market Structure and Performance’, in Fairburn
and Kay, Mergers and Merger Policy (above, n. 7), ch. 6.

8° See R. G. Lipsey, An Introduction to Positive Economics (7th ed., 1989), ch. 14; Etzioni (above,
nn. 37), at 218-20, and literature cited therein.

9Z0Z YONeV\| 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WON dno‘olWwapede//:Sdy}y WO. papeojuMog
12 Corporate Power

cheaper sources of supply.*° The effect of these various imperfections is to
cede to companies a zone of discretion in relation to products and prices and
the wide range of factors connected with the production process. The ambit
of this discretion will now be reviewed in more detail.

‘The Theory of Consumer Sovereignty

It will be convenient to examine corporate discretion over products and
prices by exploring the weaknesses in the ‘demand side’ corollary of the
theory of perfect competition, the theory of consumer sovereignty.*! This
holds that through their actions in the market consumers oblige companies
to produce the goods they require in the largest quantities at the lowest
possible price. As well as making claims about the efficiency of markets, the
theory denies the existence of producer power, at the same time drawing a
reassuring analogy with democratic control in the political sphere: corporate
behaviour is no more than a reflection of the popular will, expressed not
through the ballot box, but via individual purchase decisions.*? Once the
reality of some degree of uncompetitiveness in markets is acknowledged the
consumer’s sovereign status is inevitably diminished. It must be accepted,
however, as Lindblom has pointed out, that it is by no means wholly destroyed,
since ‘monopoly weakens responses to popular control, but it neither
eliminates a response or leads to a perverse one ... Rare, even bizarre,
circumstances aside, it never profits a monopolist to do more when customers
are signaling for less, or less when they are signaling for more’.* In the same
vein, Winter explains that ‘if consumers prefer yellow widgets to blue ones or
widgets with safety features to plain ones, and if they will pay the true cost of
such improvements, the monopolist ignores their tastes only at a financial
cost. Even in the case of a clear monopoly, therefore, markets do constrain
corporate behaviour, although output is restricted and resources misal-
located’.** But we should be careful to note that inherent in this finding of
inefficiency is also an acknowledgement of the existence of power. A
company’s ability to raise the price of its goods above the competitive level
affects the demand for its products (and, through the effect on relative prices,
the pattern of demand throughout the economy). From this it follows that a
degree of decision-making power about how society’s resources should be

49 See further F M Scherer, Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance (2nd ed., 1979),
ch. 2; Lipsey (above, n. 39), ch. 12.

41 For a further discussion of consumer sovereignty, see N. C. Smith, Morality and the Market:
Consumer Pressure for Corporate Accountability (1990), at 33-42.

*2 The analogy between voting and market behaviour is, of course, weak, not least because of
the unequal distribution of market ‘votes’ that inequality in purchasing power represents. For a
partial defence of the analogy sce C. E. Lindblom, ‘Democracy and Economic Structure’, in W.
N. Chambers and R. H. Salisbury (eds), Democracy Today: Problems and Prospects (1962), at 80.

*% C.E. Lindblom, Politics and Markets (1977), at 149.

4 R.K. Winter, Government and the Corporation (1978), at 60.

9Z0Z YOueW QO UO Jesn Ayeigr ON Aq 909PSSZPL/JeIdeY9/2/6z/4OOq/WON'dno'slwepede//:sdyy Wo pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 13

used has been transferred from the market to the enterprise. The sovereignty
of consumers has therefore become at best a shared sovereignty.

A separate source of unresponsiveness to the consumer ‘electorate’ derives
from the fact that since companies have control over the goods and services
made available to the public, consumers cannot positively ‘vote’ for the
production of goods with the particular characteristics that best suit their
requirements, but can only ‘veto’ the products they are actually offered.
Products which do not meet consumer desires will fail the market test, but
whether products come onto the market in the first place is a matter entirely
in the hands of business. Companies have in this sense the power to shape the
‘structure of opportunities’ available in society.*® A practical instance is cited
by Lindblom, who notes that

For twenty-five years after World War II, the automobile industry in the United
States demonstrated that industry response to consumer wishes can be extremely
slow. Until the last few years the entire auto industry was so fixed in its opposition to
small cars as to leave the market for them to foreign firms. Clearly corporations
exercise substantial discretionary controls over the timing and fullness of their
responses to consumer demands, including the possibility that for a decade or more
they may ignore them’.*

As this excerpt itself implies, the dynamics of competition may in due course
bring producer behaviour into line with the wishes of consumers, since there
are clear opportunities for profit in being the first to satisfy unmet demand.
Where these opportunities are ignored by domestic companies they are likely
to be exploited by those from overseas, particularly in an increasingly global
market. Nevertheless, as the quotation also illustrates, companies can have
substantial vested interests in the viability of current products and production
processes. Once the assumptions of the perfect market model are dropped it
becomes clear that they have the capacity to safeguard these interests,
manifested in a sluggishness of response, if not outright resistance, to changes
in what consumers actually want, or might want if they were aware of the
full range of possible alternatives.

It has so far been assumed that, while the corporate sector’s response to
consumer demand may be imperfect, that what is responded to is at least an
authentic expression of consumer tastes. If, however, those tastes have been
generated by companies in the first place then the idea of consumer
sovereignty is overthrown. Far from companies being part of a productive
apparatus under the ultimate control of consumers acting through the
market, the position is reversed and consumers are instead the manipulated
subjects of producer domination. It follows in virtue of this control that
companies have power not only in the sense of discretion over the allocation

*5 See generally, T. Parsons, The Soctal System (1966).
*6 Lindblom, Polztecs and Markets (above, n. 43), at 153.

9Z0Z YOJe 90 UO Jesn Ayeiqr ON Aq 909PSSZrL/JeIdeYD// /6z/4OOq/WON'dno‘slWwapese//:sdyy Wo pepeojumog
14 Corporate Power

of resources between different uses, but also in a more invasive sense of an
ability to influence individual desires and conduct. These ideas are
particularly associated with Galbraith, who refers to the process whereby
consumers are managed in the corporate interest as the ‘revised sequence’.
Instead of instruction flowing in one direction—from the consumer to the
market to the producer (the ‘accepted sequence’)—~“‘the producing arm
reaches forward to control its markets and beyond to manage the market
behaviour and shape the social attitudes of those, ostensibly, it serves’.*” Such
management, which is effected through advertising and other forms of
promotional activity,** is necessary, Galbraith argues, to minimize the risk
inherent in modern, large-scale, capital-intensive production methods.
Without the assurance that there will be a market of sufficient size for the
company’s products when they eventually come on stream (a considerable
period may elapse between product conception and realization), projects
requiring major capital investment would be too hazardous to undertake.”
Want creation is thus an essential part of a modern, technologically based
economy. Galbraith’s views have been widely criticized, most frequently on
grounds of exaggeration,” though it should be noted that he does not suggest
that the revised sequence has replaced the accepted sequence, but that there
is a complex interaction between the two. It is undeniable that consumers
have the capacity to resist the blandishments of advertisers, as borne out by
the failure of many products brought onto the market. And again, companies
that produce goods that customers ‘really’ want can be expected to out-
perform, and ultimately replace, those who merely manipulate demand.
Neverthless, the view that consumer tastes are in part the result of corporate
influence and do not originate exclusively in the autonomous individual will
is a persuasive one.”!

We should note finally a separate strand in Galbraith’s argument, to the
effect that advertising and associated activities serve the purpose not only of
promoting the products of individual companies, but also of shaping the
‘attitudes necessary for the performance and prestige of the industrial
system’.°? These attitudes involve, he suggests, a high regard for material

47 J. K. Galbraith, The New Industrial State (and ed., 1972), at 217.

*8 See Galbraith, ibid. at 208: ‘The management of demand consists in devising a sales
strategy for a particular product. It also consists in devising a product, or features of a product,
around which a sales strategy can be built. Product design, model changes, packaging and even
performance reflect the need to provide what are called strong selling points. They are as much
a part of the process of demand management as an advertising campaign.’

*® Ibid. especially chs 2 and 3.

59 For a discussion of some of the criticisms, see Smith, Morality and the Market (above, n. 41),
at 34-6. See also Hannah and Kay, Concentration in Modern Industry (above, n. 7), at 30-1.

‘| For a suggestion that the implications of this are nevertheless rarely serious, see D. Miller,
Market, State and Community (1989), ch. 5, and D. Miller, ‘Why Markets?’ in J. Le Grand and S.
Estrin (eds), Market Socialism (1989), at 38-42.

“2 Galbraith, The New Industrial State (above, n. 47), at 215. See also R. Miliband, The State in
Capitalist Society (1969), at 211-18, where the same issue is discussed from a Marxist perspective.

9Z0Z YON 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq go9PSSZPL/JeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WOd dno‘oIWwepede//:Ssdy}y WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 15

goods and consumer services in general, as distinct from non-commercial
leisure activities and forms of human association that do not depend on
commercial products, and also from publicly provided services. Without
corporate efforts to reinforce the importance of traded goods and services the
sustainability and growth of the industrial system would be at risk. Advertis-
ing and its related arts are thus necessary to ‘develop the kind of man the
goals of the industrial system require—one that reliably spends his income
and works reliably because he is always in need of more’. The extent to
which the desire for the products of industry, beyond necessities, results from
the processes of want creation as distinct from pre-existing materialistic tenden-
cies is obscure, but there is some plausibility in Galbraith’s picture of a
corporate system whose power includes an ability not only to stimulate
demand for particular goods but also to shape prevailing social values.™*

Discretion in Making Delegated Decisions

We have so far considered corporate decision-making power in the sense of
discretion over what to produce, in what quantities, and at what price. Our
conclusion was that control over these matters is not located entirely in the
market, as the theory of consumer sovereignty holds, but is divided between
companies and the market in an uncertain and complex way. Corporate
power is not, however, limited to decisions about products. In a useful
distinction, Lindblom refers to the discretion that exists also in making (often
more important) ‘delegated’ decisions. These are the ‘decisions instrumental
to production: among others, on technology, organization of the workforce,
plant location, and executive prerogatives’.** As he points out, “even in an
idealized market system, consumer control over them ranges from weak to
non-existent, except to impose least-cost decisions’.°° Thus, even on the
unrealistic assumption that consumers acting through the market are able to
force managements to produce at the lowest possible cost, companies neverthe-
less retain a discretion within that constraint over such issues as plant
location, appropriate levels of automation, and policy on research and
development, since these and other delegated questions do not yield unique
least-cost solutions. Further, the concept of least cost is not in any case self-
applying, but depends on the exercise of choice over production variables

53 Galbraith, ibid.

5¢ For an alternative analysis of why the economy might fail to supply what we ‘really want’,
see F. Hirsch, Social Limits to Growth (1977), esp. at 39-41 and 107-10. Hirsch’s thesis is that the
corporate sector is unable fully to match consumer desires because of market failure — a failure
of the price mechanism to accommodate social preference as a result of the ‘tyranny of small
decisions’: see further Ch. 10 below. Hirsch’s analysis differs from that of Galbraith in that the
former does not depend on the view that producers interfere with consumer preferences, so
much as that the price mechanism is incapable of adequately reflecting them.

5 Lindblom, Politics and Markets (above, n. 43), at 154.

5° Ibid. Cf. Winter, Government and the Corporation (above, n. 44), at 58-63.

9Z0Z Yue 90 UO Jesn AyesqiT ON Aq 909PSSZPL/JeIdeYD// Ez/OOq/WON dno‘slwepese//:sdyY Woy papeojumog
16 Corporate Power

and the time-frame. As Lindblom observes, a ‘least-cost location for a new
plant, for example, depends on the range of products that might be produced,
the flexibility built into the plant, and the period over which costs and
revenues are estimated’.®’ The scope of corporate discretion in making
delegated decisions is obviously extended substantially once the unrealistic
perfect-competition assumption is dropped. Weaknesses in the corporate
governance structure and slackness in the other markets that constrain
management behaviour® also mean that despite the existence of these
additional controls managers will often have considerable latitude to depart
from the requirements of least cost. Whether managers fully exploit the
pocket of discretion created by product-market imperfections and the
inadequacy of other constraints depends on the intensity of their commitment
to profit maximization. A number of theories maintain that managerial self-
interest is better promoted by the pursuit of objectives other than profit
maximization, and it is also argued, perhaps with less plausibility, that
managers may seek to further some sub-profit-maximizing conception of the
public good. We will explore in due course whether these objectives are
pursued to any significant extent in practice.®® For the moment the point is
that in the conditions that many companies face managements have a
discretion to make delegated decisions not only within the least-cost
constraint but also to some extent outside it.

If companies have discretion in making delegated decisions, in what ways
might the exercise of that discretion significantly affect others, demonstrating
the existence of power? One group conspicuously affected by corporate
decision-making is the company’s employees. It was mentioned above that
employees are subject to company power in the sense of being in an
authority relationship with the employer. One aspect of company power of
the different kind that is in issue here lies in the company’s ability to shape
the terms of that relationship. As far as wage levels are concerned, this is self-
evidently an area in which corporate discretion is not unbounded,
particularly in view of the countervailing power of trade unions. The
strength of union bargaining power is, however, variable, being dependent
on such factors as levels of unionization, the regulatory controls to which
unions are reauired to conform, the ease with which the employer can
transfer operations to another country, and not least the state of the employ-
ment market. An area of corporate discretion traditionally less constrained
by bargaining relates to the nature of the work experience: whether, for
instance, employees are allowed to participate in decision-making at appropri-
ate levels in the organization; whether attempts are made to enrich otherwise
boring jobs by rotation of tasks; or whether the introduction of new technol-

57 Lindblom, ibid. at 155.
58 See 113-32, bclow.
°° See Chs 2 and g below.

9Z0Z YONeW\| 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq go9PSSZP1L/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOG/WoN'dno‘silWwapede//:sdyy WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 17

ogy leads to deskilling or instead prompts investment in the acquisition of
new competencies. These and similar decisions not only affect how a
substantial proportion of the population spend their working lives, but also
influence the level and distribution of skills within the workforce, which in
turn is a determinant of national economic success.

Corporate decision-making, of course, affects not only what employees do
at work, but sometimes whether an employee has a job at all. As Hannah
and Kay observe, ‘the elimination of inefficient productive capacity is now
less frequently achieved through the action of bankruptcy in a competitive
market process, but more commonly emanates from decisions to ‘rationalise’
made by a bureaucratic organization’. They go on to say that large firms ‘are
constrained in some way [in making these decisions| by the requirement to
make profits and serve consumers’, but it is nevertheless appropriate to stress
that companies will usually have optzons about how to manage the impact of
changed market conditions or technology: the company is not merely a
passive instrument of the market. Responses which may be open to the
company range from plant closures and mass redundancies, through scaling-
down operations with some job losses, to investment in alternative productive
capacity with partial or full retention of the workforce. It is also important to
note that the option chosen will often affect not only the employees directly
involved, but may also have a significant impact on the local economy.
Large-scale redundancies, particularly where the company employs a sizeable
proportion of the workforce, are liable to result in a substantial reduction in
local purchasing power; this may in turn have a knock-on effect on other
local businesses and on local tax revenues and hence municipally provided
services, and the ensuing high level of unemployment is likely to contribute
more generally to a weakening of community relations.®!

‘Turning to the impact of corporate discretion on communities more
generally, it is clear that decisions about the location of company activities
can have major implications for the economic, environmental, social, and
cultural well-being of urban centres and entire regions. As Kaysen notes,
‘Where new plants are placed both in regional terms and in relation to
existing centers of population affects the balance of regional development
and the character of urban and suburban growth’.® These decisions are not,
needless to say, left wholly to companies. The system of planning controls
imposes limits on their freedom to locate operations where they will or to
increase the scale or change the nature of the activities carried on at a
particular site. And national or local government may offer subsidies for
businesses to set up in favoured areas. Nevertheless, negative planning

6° Hannah and Kay, Concentration in Modern Industry (above, n. 7), at 29-30 (emphasis in
original).

6! See J. W. Singer, “The Reliance Interest in Property’, (1988) 40 Stan L Rev 611, at 717-20.

6? Kaysen, ‘How Much Power?’ (above, n. 33), at 93.

9ZOZ Yok! QO UO Jesn AJeugiT ON Aq 9o9PSSZP1/HeIdeUD// /E7/4OOG/WON'dno‘slWwapede//:sdyy WO pepeojuMog
18 Corporate Power

controls and the positive inducements of regional policy leave the basic
initiative about locational decisions with the company. It should be noted
further that these decisions affect not only the physical character of an area,
including its infrastructure requirements and the condition of the local
environment, but also the range and type of other economic activities that
are carried on there. The construction of a large production plant may, for
instance, attract an influx of other manufacturers to supply it. Of particular
significance is the siting of company head offices, research and development
facilities, and various other executive functions. These create a demand for a
mix of local support services such as those of financial institutions, lawyers,
and technicians, and whose availability may attract into the area additional
users of these services, strengthening its economic base.** A region dominated
by branch assembly facilities and devoid of senior decision-makers, in
contrast, is likely not only to suffer from a sense of remoteness from those
who control its destiny, but will also tend to lack social diversity and cultural
vitality.

The consequences of corporate discretion in the field of research and
development are worldwide and pervasive. Kaysen has pointed out that:

Decisions as to the technical areas which will be systematically explored by research
and development divisions and decisions as to what scientific and technical novelties
will be translated into new products and processes and tried out for economic
viability have very deep effects. Ultimately, the whole material fabric of society, the
structure of occupations, the geographic distribution of economic activity and popula-
tion are all profoundly affected by the pattern of technical change.™

Research is, of course, carried on outside the corporate sector in universities
and other institutions of learning; even so, these bodies are increasingly
dependent on commercial sponsorship, and corporate funds tend to flow
more readily into projects identified by, or otherwise of interest to the

* It has been suggested that the presence of indigenous banking and other financial services
are of prime importance in retaining local decision-making power: Scott, Corporations Classes and
Capitalism (above, n. 20), at 214. See also Guinness PLC and the Scottish Economy (1987; report of a
conference sponsored by the City of Edinburgh District Council), where the loss of decision-
making autonomy in the Scottish economy is discussed in general, and in particular the issues
surrounding the breach of the undertakings given by Guinness during the take-over of Distillers
to site the enlarged group’s headquarters in Scotland are considered.

%* ‘The tendency for decision-making authority to be centralized was noted by the Bullock
Committee, Report of the Committee of Inquiry on Industrial Democracy (Cmnd 6706, 1977), at 20:

As companies have grown in size and complexity, they have also tended to become remote

from the people whom they employ. Major decisions about the nature of a company’s or a

plant’s organization, affecting closely the future of the local community or the jobs of the

employees, may often be taken far away from the site by the directors of a parent or holding
company, sometimes by the management of a parent company overseas.
See also CBI, Investing for Britain’s Future: Report of the City/Industry Task Force (1987), para 127,
and the discussion of the impact of take-overs on regional diversity and development at 126-7,
below.
® Kaysen, ‘How Much Power?’ (above, n. 33), at 93.

9Z0Z YOueW QO UO Jesn Ayeigr ON Aq 909PSSZPL/JeIdeY9/2/6z/4OOq/WON'dno'slwepede//:sdyy Wo pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 19

sponsor. And it is industry that usually has control over which developments
are taken up and marketed.

This list of areas affected by corporate discretion could go on, taking in
decisions about the environment, the employment and promotion of women
and members of racial minorities, and issues of mainstream business policy
not so far touched on. Decisions of the latter kind, about whether to import
components or obtain them locally, for instance, or about investment policy
in a recession or pay restraint, can have major implications for national
economic performance. Mention should also be made of the importance of
large corporate organizations as disseminators of news, entertainment, and
cultural values, bringing an ability to influence perceptions of political and
social issues and prompting Goyder to ask whether ‘spiritual and intellectual
values [can] be safeguarded when the channels for their transmission to the
masses are cut in commercial grooves for commercial ends’. But by now the
basic point is clear. Corporate freedom of action is bounded by law (the
rights of employees, environmental controls, and so on) and constrained by
markets, but within these limitations there is a core of real business discretion.
It is with the legitimacy of this discretion, and particularly with the form
that the rules of company law should take in order to control it in the public
interest, that this book is principally concerned.

Political Power

Arguments that companies possess political power, defined here as the ability
to influence government policy and law-making, should finally be noted.®’ A
recurrent theme in the literature is that the position of business in relation to
government differs from that of other interest groups by virtue of the
possession by companies of ‘real’ power——social decision-making power as it
has been termed above. Marsh and Locksley, for instance, contend that
business ‘is different from other interests because it exercises power or
influence in two ways-——directly through interest groups and structurally
because of the crucial role boards and managers exercise over production,
investment and employment decisions which shape the economic and political
environment within which Governments make policy’. To elaborate, busi-

6 G. Goyder, The Responsible Company (1961), at 54.

°’ For completeness, attempts by companies to protect their interests through unlawful
interference in the government process should also be mentioned, graphic examples being the
participation of the American company United Fruit in the overthrow of the government of
Honduras in the 1950s and the more recent bribing by the Lockheed Corporation of the prime
minister of Japan. For a discussion of the (not necessarily unlawful) involvement of British
companies in international affairs, see Stopford and ‘Turner, Britain and the Multinationals (above,
n. 19), at 210-14.

6° PD. Marsh and G. Locksey, ‘Capital in Britain: Its Structural Power and Influence Over
Policy’, (1983) 6 West European Politics 36, at 59, discussed in W. Grant, Business and Politics in
Britain (1987), at 19. See also Herman, Corporate Control, Corporate Power (above, n.1g), at 184:

9Z0Z YONeV\| 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WON dno‘olWwapede//:Sdy}y WO. papeojuMog
20 Corporate Power

ness, like other interest groups, makes representations to government in order
to influence government policy.® But company decision-making also shapes
the economic context in which policy is formulated and hence constrains the
available policy choices. And further, the crucial role of companies at the
structural level substantially enhances the bargaining power of business in its
dealings with government, giving it a special influence which other interest
groups lack. Important to this analysis 1s the fact that the electoral prospects
of democratic governments are substantially dependent on the overall
performance of the economy, something that is at least partially under
business control. This being so, it is essential for government to retain the
confidence, and hence the cooperation, of the business sector by maintaining
the conditions for its profitability. In an increasingly internationalized
economy particularly, governments must be sensitive to how their policies
will be perceived by business interests, since an adverse reaction can lead to
rapid and massive capital outflows and consequent economic destabilization,
or the relocation of productive capacity to more hospitable environments
with an equally obvious effect on jobs and growth.

One concrete result of government dependence on business, as Lindblom
has noted, is the corporate sector’s ability to extract ‘inducements in the
form of market and political benefits’, for example, tax concessions and
subsidies. Another is that governments must be cautious in their regulatory
policies, avoiding ‘excessive’ regulation that might damage profitability;
governments that ‘go too far’ may be subjected to direct pressure from
industry to dilute regulatory regimes.”’ It has been suggested further that

‘capitalism as a system imposes constraints on government, and these constraints are fixed
mainly by the requirements of business. This results first and automatically from the strategic
position of business in carrying out basic economic functions, and thus in making key decisions
on production, investment, and employment that are crucial to community welfare. For a
comparison of pluralist, neo-pluralist, and Marxist analyses of corporate influence over the
democratic process see D. Held, Models of Democracy (1987), ch. 6.

6 For a discussion of the role of company government relations departments, see Grant, ibid.
ch. 5, and sec chs 6 and 7 on the representation of sectoral and industry-wide interests by trade
associations and the CBI.

” Lindblom, Politics and Markets (above, n. 43), at 173.

71 Devine et al, Introduction to Industrial Economics (above, n. 3) at 98, suggest that this is
illustrated by the way in which recommendations of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission
have been dealt with: ‘typically the government has entered into negotiations with the firms in
question, and the outcome has usually been agreement on a course of action that has fallen well
short of that recommended by the Commission but has been more acceptable to the firms’. A
recent example is the treatment of the MMC report on the brewing industry; after intense
lobbying by the industry the controls adopted were much less stringent than those originally
proposed: see the Financial Times, 12 July 1989. See also M. Jacobs, The Green Economy:
Environment, Sustainable Development and the Politics of the Future (1991), at 41 (pressure by oil
companies and the motor industry during the 1g70s and 1980s to prevent and then delay
legislation enforcing unleaded petrol). And note D. L. Engel, ‘An Approach to Corporate Social
Responsibility’, (1979) 32 Stan L Rev 1, at 70-5. While in general opposed to departure from the
goal of profit maximization for ‘socially responsible’ purposes, Engel accepts that companies
should voluntarily forebear from interference in government processes. There is a substantial

9Z0Z YONeW\| 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq go9PSSZP1L/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOG/WoN'dno‘silWwapede//:sdyy WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 21

corporate ambitions extend beyond influencing the detail of regulation, with
Reagan, for instance, claiming that

Corporations are not only much concerned to protect their own immediate legislative
interests, but are reaching out in an attempt to create a business-oriented political
and social framework within which all public decision-making would be constrained.
Instead of the society channelling business decisions within the bounds of public
interest, the corporations seek to channel public-interest decisions within business-

interest bounds’.’?

An example might be business efforts to create a climate unsympathetic to
high levels of corporate and personal taxation, with the consequences this en-
tails for the public provision of services in areas such as health and educa-
tion.”? Cohen draws attention to the structural limitations on government
freedom of action by pointing to the difficulties that a government might face
in attempting simultaneously to increase growth and to redistribute income,
given that high taxation would weaken the incentives of companies to
invest.”* Whether or not we accept these points, their importance for the
present discussion is clear. They indicate a need for a measure of caution,
first, about the ability of the state to constrain the self-interested exercise of
corporate decision-making power through external regulation. Second, they
call into question the capacity of the state to reorder corporate objectives by
intervening in the internal governance processes of companies or to make
more fundamental changes to productive arrangements should conventional
regulatory techniques appear inadequate.

Ill CORPORATE POWER AND THE NEED FOR A PUBLIC-INTEREST
JUSTIFICATION

As stated earlier, the purpose of this book is to examine certain aspects of
company law from a particular point of view, one which takes the relevant
rules to be part of the machinery by which power, and particularly what we

literature on the separate issue of the ‘capture’ of regulatory agencies by the companies they
regulate: see e.g, G. Richardson, A. Ogus, and P. Burrows, Policing Pollution: A Study of Regulation
and Enforcement (1982), at 63-4 and refs. See also L. Hancher and M. Moran, ‘Organizing
Regulatory Space’, in L. Hancher and M. Moran (eds), Capitalism, Culture and Regulation (1989),
271, at 274-6, doubting the coherence of the notion of autonomous spheres of regulators and
regulatecs,

72M. D. Reagan, The Managed Economy (1963), at 129-30. See also the discussion of the role
of social reponsibility as a means of heading off public policies damaging to business interests, Ch.
9 below.

3 Ibid. at 130-1.

™% See M. Cohen, ‘The Economic Basis of Deliberative Democracy’, in E. F. Paul, F. D.
Miller, and J. Paul (eds), Soctalism (1989), 25, at 28, and references cited therein. For a
discussion of the concept of power as involving the restriction of choice in the political sphere,
see Lukes Power: A Radical View (above, n. 34), ch. 7.

9Z0Z YONeV\ 9O UO Jesn Ayeuqiq ON Aq 9o9¥SSZP1/HeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WOd'dno‘o|Wapede//:Sdy}Y WO pepeojuMog
22 Corporate Power

have called social decision-making power, is sustained and regulated. The
legal duties and control structures imposed or sanctioned by company law
shape the criteria by which companies exercise social decision-making power.
Some advocates of corporate social responsibility (the term is deeply ambigu-
ous, as will be seen in Chapter g) maintain that companies should allow
their decisions to be influenced not only by profit, but also by social policy
factors. This causes them to argue for a loosening of the legal duties that
define the objectives of management decision making, which currently
emphasize the maximization of shareholder wealth,” to enable a broader
range of purposes to be pursued. And in some cases there is support for more
elaborate reforms to ensure that social-welfare considerations are given
appropriate weight in decision-making and are not left merely to managerial
discretion. Critics of these views, on the other hand, insist that the public
interest is properly served only where companies pursue the traditional goal
of profit maximization. These positions have in common that they express a
view about how company law should regulate corporate power in the public
interest: by introducing social-welfare considerations as explicit decision-
making criteria, or by excluding them and relying instead on the benign
effects of the invisible hand, guided where necessary by external legal
controls. The merits of the respective arguments will not be considered until
Chapter 1o. In this section the object is to examine in some detail the
important preliminary issue of why the debate should be one about the
public interest in the first place, and why company law should not be seen
instead as being solely concerned with the furtherance of the interests of
shareholders and the protection of creditors. It should also be emphasized at
this point that references to the ‘public interest’ are not intended to imply
that there is a consensus about what constitutes the public good or that it is
objectively determinable. The discussion in this chapter and throughout the
book is less concerned with what the public interest actually is (though the
issue cannot be ignored) than with appropriate mechanisms for securing it.
Nor in referring to the ‘public interest’ is it necessarily intended to suggest
that there is an interest that should be served that transcends the interests of
the individuals who are affected by corporate activity. Rather the term is
meant to refer to some defensible balancing of the interests of affected groups,
be they for example employees, customers, suppliers, the local community, or
the community at large on the one hand, with on the other those of the share-
holders and creditors that are the more traditional concern of company law.
A well-established approach denies that the public interest is the relevant
standard, or at least the primary standard, by which company law should be
assessed. It sees companies as purely private organizations, existing for
whatever purposes their members intend. ‘There is no assumption that they

8 See Ch. 3, below.

9Z0Z YoueY| 90 UO Jesn AJeugiq ON Aq 9o9PSSZPL/Me]deUD///€7/400q/WOd dno‘olWwepede//:sdyjy WO. papeojuMog
Corporate Power 23

should serve the public good, though the approach recognizes that their
operations are, in fact, highly beneficial to society. From this perspective
proposals to redefine corporate decisional criteria in the public interest are
misplaced. External regulation, at least in a form that applies to all citizens
equally, is legitimate, but state intervention beyond that constitutes an illicit
curtailment of individual freedom. The point then is not that reforms will
necessarily fail in their objective of furthering the public good (though this 1s
normally supposed), but that interference in company affairs for that purpose
is morally impermissible. We intend to reject this approach, and instead to
embrace Dahl’s claim that ‘every large corporation should be thought of as a
social enterprise; that is, as an entity whose existence and decisions can be
justified only insofar as they serve public or social purposes’.’® ‘The reason
large companies should be viewed as social enterprises relies, it is suggested,
on a political theory about the legitimacy of private power. That theory
holds that the possession of social decision-making power by companies is
legitimate (that is, there are good reasons for regarding its possession as
justified)”’ only if this state of affairs is in the public interest. Since the public
interest is the foundation of the legitimacy of companies, it follows that
society is entitled to ensure that corporate power is exercised in a way that is
consistent with that interest. To describe companies as social enterprises is
thus to make a claim about the grounds of their legitimacy, and its practical
significance is to hold that the state is entitled to prescribe the terms on
which corporate power may be possessed and exercised.”

7° R. A. Dahl, ‘A Prelude to Corporate Reform’, (1972) Business and Society Review 17
(emphasis in original), And see A. A. Berle and G. C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private
Property (1932, rev. ed. 1967), book 4, ch. iv; A. Chayes, “he Modern Corporation and the
Rule of Law’, in E. Mason (ed.), The Corporation and Modern Society (1959), 25; G. Goyder, The
Responsible Company (1961); K. W. Wedderburn, Company Law Reform Fabian Tract 363 (1965),
and generally, W. W. Bratton, “The “Nexus of Contracts” Corporation: A Critical Appraisal’,
(1989) 74 Cornell L Rev 407, at 437-8.

7 i.e. a normative, as opposed to an empirical, concept of legitimacy is being adopted. Cf. M.
A. Eisenberg, ‘Corporate Legitimacy, Conduct, and Governance ~ Two Models of the Corpora-
tion’, (1983) 17 Creighton L R 1, at 4, who suggests that it is appropriate to view the legitimacy of
corporate power as an empirical question, referring to the ‘widely accepted conception under
which the legitimacy of an institution depends on its popular acceptance, so that legitimacy is
an empirical rather than a deductive phenomenon’, In one sense this still relies on a normative
concept in that popular acceptance is taken to be a good reason for regarding the company as
legitimate. The significance of popular acceptance is however problematical: what weight
should be given to it (assuming that it exists) in the absence of detailed popular knowledge
about, and an effective choice between, alternative arrangements?

© There has been some recognition in the company law reform process in the UK of the
‘public’ status of companies: P. Bircher, ‘Company Law Reform and the Board of Trade, 1929-
43’, (1988) 18 Accounting and Business Research 107, at 116-9, in discussing the background to the
formation of the Company Law Amendment Committee (the Cohen Committee) in 1943 notes
the attitude during the Second World War, linked to a change in social attitudes generally, to
the effect that companies were bodies existing primarily for the public good. A more limited
connection between the company and the public interest (i.e. interests other than those of the
members and creditors) is made in the White Paper, Company Law Reform (1973, Gmnd. 5391),

9Z0Z YOueW 90 UO Jesn Ayeiqi7 ON Aq gO09PSSZPL/JeIdeYD/2 /Ez/4OOq/WON dno‘slwepese//:sdyY Woy pepeojumog
24 Corporate Power

It should be stressed at the outset that maintaining that large companies
are social enterprises involves no necessary finding that the root principle
beneath the current rules of company law, that companies exist to make
profits for the benefit of shareholders, is unsatisfactory. It is quite possible
that that arrangement is the one that is most conducive to the public good.
But the point is that making profits for shareholders must now be seen as a
mechanism for promoting the public interest, and not as an end in itself. It
follows that society is entitled to insist, for example, that companies are
equipped with governance structures adequate to enforce a commitment to
profits on the part of management and to promote the efficient operation of
the business.”® And the detailed rules of company law must be tested, not just
to sec how well they serve the interests of shareholders, but also how well
they serve the interests of society in having an efficient and productive
economy. A separate dimension of the social enterprise perspective is that if
we view the company as a public or social body, albeit under private
control, then its directors and managers should be held to requirements of
disclosure and standards of ethical conduct appropriate to those carrying out
public functions. Galbraith has described the denomination of corporate
enterprise as ‘private enterprise’ as ‘a formula for hiding public business
behind the cloak of corporate privacy’; it is a device for diverting the eyes of
government and the general public ‘from things like executive compensation,
lobbying, political activity by executives and employees, profits, and
bureaucratic error or nonfeasance’.” If we reclassify companies as social
enterprises such issues are then not only matters of legitimate public concern
about which the public has a right to information, but also matters in which
the state is entitled to intervene in order to safeguard the public interest and
to ensure compliance with publicly acceptable ethical standards.

It may be, on the other hand, that profit maximization within the law is
too limited a formula for aligning corporate decision-making with the public
good. Without examining at this stage the measures that might be necessary
to improve the responsiveness of companies to the interests of the various
groups that make up ‘the public’, we should note that the social enterprise
perspective supplies a justificatory foundation for the relevant programme of
reform. That foundation is analytically stronger than one relying on the
casual observation that since companies possess power, they must use that
power ‘responsibly’. Rather, because the public interest is taken to be the

which, at 5, acknowledges that companies ‘have a manifest obligation towards all those with
whom they have dealings’: see the discussion in D. Imberg and P. MacMahon, ‘Company Law
Reform’, in (1973) 1 Secial Audit 3.

79 See C. Graham, ‘Regulating the Company’, in L. Hancher and M. Moran (eds), Capitalism,
Culture and Regulation (1989) 199. For arguments to the effect that optimal governance structures
evolve through the process of contracting by corporate participants and the impact of market
forces, and without the need for external intervention, see 177-90 below.

80 Galbraith, ‘On the Economic Image of Corporate Enterprise’ (above, n. 35), at 5-6.

9Z0Z Ye 90 UO Jesn AJeIQI] ON Aq 909PSSZrL/JeIdeYd// /E7/4OOq/W0d'dno‘siwepedce//:sdyjy Wo pepeo|uMog
Corporate Power 25

root of corporate legitimacy, compliance with whatever ‘social responsibility’
demands is seen as a prerequisite, a defining condition, for the possession of
power.*! It follows that changes to the legal framework that are deemed
necessary to encourage or induce the desired behaviour should be viewed as
permissible even though a substantial curtailment of shareholder nghts may
be involved. Social responsibility is thus not merely a matter of the voluntary
adoption of changed standards. Further, because the public interest is the
foundation of corporate legitimacy, demands for responsibility need not be
confined to the avoidance of obvious forms of social harm, such as might
result from pollution, dangerous products, or false advertising, but potentially
embrace all exercises of social decision-making power by companies, for
example, in relation to plant closures or policy on research and development,
and the various other manifestations of corporate discretion that were
considered earlier.

The Concession and Contract Theories of the Company

The idea that companies should be viewed as social enterprises does not
depend on a theory specifically about the nature of the corporate form, but,
as has been mentioned, on a theory about the circumstances in which power
may legitimately be held. In arguing that large companies are social
enterprises there is therefore no intention to revive the concession theory of
the company, at least in its traditional form. That theory and its antithesis,
the contract theory, share a common assumption that whether or not society
has a right to demand that companies serve the public interest depends on
whether the state can be depicted as playing some special role in corporate
existence, different in kind from its role in sustaining unincorporated busi-
nesses. It is worth spending some time in showing that this assumption is
false, and why the theories that employ it should be rejected. If the assump-
tion is false, then the contract theory, while currently popular in some
quarters, cannot in itself immunize the company from _ public-interest
demands, nor explain why the state may not intervene in companies’
‘internal affairs’ in order to enforce those demands.

The concession theory regards the company as owing its existence to an
exercise of state power.®? More specifically, in allowing certain individuals

®! For a brief discussion of the relationship between corporate power and responsibility, see T.
F, McMahon, ‘Models of the Relationship of the Firm to Society’, (1986) 5 7 Bus Ethics 181.

8 ‘The concession theory is often coupled with, but should be distinguished from, the fiction
theory. The latter is one of three ontological theories concerned with the nature of corporate
personality; it regards the company as an artificial entity distinct from its human participants.
This fits well with (though is not necessitated by) the concession theory, which explains the
creation of this new being by reference to an exercise of state power. The contract theory, on the
other hand, would find the existence of a separate person difficult to account for, a problem
which is avoided by treating the company as being no more than an aggregation of its

9Z0Z YOJeW 90 UO Jesn Areign ON Aq 909PSSZPL/seIdeUD/1 /EzPOOg/WOD dno‘s}Wapede//:sdyY WO papeojuMog
26 Corporate Power

the benefits of incorporation the state is viewed as having made a concession
or having bestowed a privilege on them.** This favourable treatment is
explained and justified on the basis that the corporators are required to
perform public functions in addition to serving their own private interests. In
contrast, the contract theory sees the company as the result of a purely
private initiative. It is the outcome of a series of contracts between, among
others, the founding shareholders and managers: in so far as the state has a
role in corporate creation it is not materially different from its role in
enforcing contracts in general.** Given, therefore, that the company has
come about essentially through private means, it must be understood as a
private body, to be run by the corporators for their own self-selected
purposes, and without any obligation to further the greater good.

The importance of the concession theory is that it establishes a theoretical
framework sympathetic to state intervention; the company is a creature of
the state, existing to promote the public welfare, and as such the state has
the right to interfere in its internal affairs and need not confine itself to
external, general-law regulation. The state may thus mould the company’s
constitution so as to protect the interests of parties directly involved, for
instance the interests of shareholders against abuse of position by manage-
ment, but it also has a much broader right of intervention, allowing it, if

individual members. A third ontological position, the natural entity theory, views the company
(somewhat mysteriously) as a real entity, distinct from its members, and with an existence
independent of the state. M. J. Horwitz, ‘Santa Clara Revisited: The Development of Corporate
Theory,’ (1985) 88 W Va L Rev 173, suggests that this theory, popular in the United States
during the period of the rise of the management corporation, was relied on to legitimate that
form of organization. Cf. D. Millon, “Theories of the Corporation’, [1990] Duke L 7 201, at 241~-
2, who argues that there is a more complex, two-way relationship between theories of what
companies are on the one hand and legal doctrine and social practice on the other. As a matter
of legal analysis, the nature of the corporate body is unproblematical ~ it is a separate, artificial
entity with some of the attributes of a natural person, as defined by law: see J. Dewey, “The
Historic Background of Corporate Legal Personality’, (1926) 35 Yale L F 655; H. L. A. Hart,
‘Definition and Theory in Jurisprudence’, (1954) 7o LQR 37. It is proposed to treat the
ontological debate as subsidiary to the political/justificatory one, and so it will not be explored
further here in its own right. For the theory of corporate legal personality generally, see R. W.
N, Dias, Jurisprudence (5th ed., 1985), ch. 12; see also the discussion of the ontological theories in
W. W. Bratton, ‘The New Economic Theory of the Firm: Critical Perspectives from History’
(1989) 41 Stan L Rev 147; Millon, “Theories of the Corporation’, above; J. C. Coates, ‘State
Takeover Statutes and Corporate Theory: The Revival of An Old Debate’ (1989) 64 NYULR Rev
806, and see W. H. Simon, ‘Contract Versus Politics in Corporation Doctrine’, in D. Kairys
(ed.), The Politics of Law: A Progressive Critique (rev. ed., 1990), 387, at 389-91.

83 One variant of the theory dates from the Middle Ages, its function being to support the
claim of centralizing state authorities to be entitled to control groupings that might grow into
rival sources of power: sec Dewey, ibid.

8* Contractual theories of the company have been invoked during different historical periods,
for different purposes. The concern here is with the role of contract in establishing the private
nature of the company in opposition to the claims of the concession theory. Ch. 6 will explore
the modern ‘nexus of contracts’ theory, the origins of which lie in economics. It has been relied
on to combat the theory of management power vis-a-vis investors, and the view that companies as
a result of that power are inefficient, and accordingly in need of structural reform.

9Z0Z Yue QO UO Jesn Ayeiqr7 ON Aq gO09PESZPL/JOIdeYUD/2 /Ez/4OOqG/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyY Wo. pepeojumog
Corporate Power 2/

appropriate, to redefine corporate objectives to secure compliance with
favoured social goals. As might be anticipated, the contract theory denies
that companies have any special relationship with the state that would justify
such a right. Companies are merely voluntary associations of individuals
joined together by contract, and correspondingly the state has no greater
standing to intervene in corporate affairs than it has in the individual affairs
of the citizens who make up the company. In short, the debate turns on two
overlapping questions. First, has the state conferred special benefits on the
corporators such as to justify a right of intervention of a kind that does not
exist in regard to other business forms? Second, is it appropriate to regard
the state as bringing companies into existence on the understanding that
they are to carry out public purposes, and hence similarly justifying a right
of intervention?

Few would now give a positive answer to these questions. It is widely
accepted that attempts to apply the concession theory in modern conditions
are inapposite.*® There is no longer any ‘privilege’ involved in obtaining
corporate status and the source of companies’ ‘economic energy’ undoubtedly
lies in individual initiative and not in the state.®® Historically there was a
‘privilege’, and it took a number of different forms. First, incorporation itself
was a privilege in the sense that it was an advantage that was not available
to all, being dependent on an exercise of state discretion by way of the grant
of a royal charter or a specific Act of Parliament. But with the enactment of
general incorporation statutes, corporate status, and then limited lability,
became freely available to any applicant on registration,®” and hence the
element of differential treatment on which the concession theory partly rests
disappeared. Second, a range of collateral benefits have in different periods

8 See e.g. M. Stokes, ‘Company Law and Legal Theory’, in W. Twining (ed.), Legal Theory
and Common Law (1986) 155, at 162-5; N Barry, The Morality of Business Enterprise (1991), ch. 2.
Bratton, “The “Nexus of Contracts’? Corporation’ (above, n. 76), at 343-436, suggests that the
theory has no modern proponents and is merely set up by contract theorists for the ease with
which it can be knocked down. The language of the concession theory is, however, still in
current use, though not necessarily with any intention to rely on a technical concession
. argument: see, e.g. R. A. Dahl, (above, n. 76, emphasis omitted), who asks ‘why should we,
through our government, grant special rights, powers, and privileges, protections and benefits to
any firm except on the understanding that its activities are to fulfill our purposes?’ And see
Wedderburn, Company Law Reform (above, n. 76), at 2 -3; Graham, ‘Regulating the Company’
(above, n. 79), at 200.

8 See W. W. Bratton, “The New Economic Theory of the Firm’ (1989) 41 Stan L Rev 14.71, at
1475. See also T. Donaldson, Corporations and Morality (1982), ch. 3, and E. M. Hartman,
‘Donaldson on Rights and Corporate Obligations’ in R. E. Freeman (ed.), Business Ethics: The
State of the Art (1991) 163, at 170-72.

87 In 1844 and 1855, respectively. And see Canada National Fire Assurance Co v Hastings [1918]
ACG 451, at 456, per Sir Walter Phillimore: companies ‘are formed by contract ... under
memorandum and articles of association to which the Registrar of Joint-Stock Companies
necessarily assents if the documents are in regular form’. For a brief history of the development
of the corporate form and references to more detailed source material, see L. C. B. Gower,
Principles of Modern Company Law (5th ed., 1992), chs 2 and 3.

9Z0Z Yue 90 UO Jesn AyesqiT ON Aq 909PSSZPL/JeIdeYD// Ez/OOq/WON dno‘slwepese//:sdyY Woy papeojumog
28 Corporate Power

also accompanied incorporation. Commonly, these took the form of monoploy
rights,®* possessed by such early incorporated bodies as the medieval guilds,”
and later by the overseas trading companies, for example the Merchant
Adventurers and the East India Company.” In the nineteenth century
incorporation of utility and railway companies was also generally ac-
companied by other inducements and special powers deemed necessary for
the success of the undertaking, such as rights of compulsory acquisition of
land.*' Today, of course, corporate status carries no implication that the
business has in some other way been favourably treated by the state, and so
in this respect too the idea of privilege is now inappropriate.

In the past the company’s status as a body responsible for the performance
of public functions, and the idea that public benefit was a prerequisite of
incorporation, were also evident. The craft guilds, for example, supervised
the quality of their members’ work and imposed standards of fair dealing in
the public interest.%? Similarly, with the state lacking means of its own to
regulate the conduct of business by its subjects overseas it was convenient to

* The idea that companies were anti-competitive per se lingered on into the nineteenth
century: see P. 8. Atiyah, The Rese and Fall of Freedom of Contract (1979), at 563-4. In the United
States fear of market domination and associated economic and political power resulted in the
imposition of restrictions on the capital, duration and objects of companies even after incorpora-
tion became freely available: see J. W. Hurst, The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation in the Law
of the United States 1780-1970 (1970), ch. 1; Bratton, ‘The New Economic Theory of the Firm’
(above, n. 86), at 1486; Coates, ‘State Takeover Statutes’ (above, n. 77), at 811-18; Nader,
Green, and Seligman, Taming the Giant Corporation (above, n. 34), ch. 2; Lord Wedderburn,
‘Trust, Corporation and the Worker’, (1985) 23 Osgoode Hall L F 203, at 206-207; D. Millon,
‘Theories of the Corporation’, [1990] Duke L J 201, at 207-11. In this country restrictions on the
scope of the company’s business by way of the ultra vires doctrine were viewed more as a means
of protecting members and creditors than of limiting corporate influence; see e.g. the speech of
Lord Hatherley in Ashbury Railway Carriage G Iron Co v Riche (1875) L R 7 HL 653.

8° These bear little resemblance to the modern corporate enterprise, being made up of
individual craftsmen and merchants who traded on their own account and not by mcans of a
joint fund. The function of the corporate body was to hold the legal charter which conferred on
the members a territorial or occupational monopoly and various other privileges: see C. A.
Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company (1950), ch. 2.

9 Originally the companies, some of which date from the fourteenth century, were composed
of traders operating on their own account under the umbrella of the chartered body, in the
manner of the guilds. During the course of the seventeenth century, however, the practice
developed of the company itself trading with a joint stock contributed by the members, and
ultimately the members were forbidden to trade on their own account: see Gower, Principles of
Modern Company Law (above, n. 87), at 21. As well as possessing a monopoly of trade with a
specified region, the members of the companies also enjoyed exemption from various statutes
imposing penalties for ‘unlawful assembly, illegal oaths, and leaving the country with ships,
goods, gold and men’: sce Cooke, ibid. at 49-50.

9! See Cooke, ibid. at 118-293; for a discussion of the similar position in the United States see
Hurst, The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation (above, n. 88), at 23-4, and 60-1.

® See Cooke, ibid. 27. Comparing guilds with municipal corporations, Cooke explains that

The corporate form in both was applied to a public purpose in which the widest considerations

of social welfare and the social good were put before the interests of the members of the

corporation, Both gild and borough remained for some centuries organs of government in
adjacent fields; the link between them was this common purpose of government, and they
shared the end of control on behalf of the community of which they were organs.

9Z0Z YON QO UO Jesn AJeigiq ON Aq go9PSSZPL/eIdeUD// /€7/4OOG/WoN'dno‘slWwapede//:sdyy WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 29

delegate this function to the great trading companies, which also assumed
responsibility for general colonial administration. The companies thus pro-
vided ‘the requisite amount of public law for local government, trade
organization, control of the customs and foreign policy’,*? as well as serving
national commercial interests by gaining access to natural resources and
expanding overseas trade. Cooke notes that this equation of incorporation
with public service continued into the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, with the general theory of corporate form still dominated by ‘the
concept of the corporation as a public body, an institution created by specific
act of Parliament or the Crown for purposes’ approved as being in the
national interest’.°* In accordance with this concept incorporation was, for
example, much easier to obtain in the case of transport and utility undertak-
ings, such as canals, railways and waterworks, than for ordinary trading
ventures.” Here the public interest in encouraging the private provision of a
transport infrastructure and the other prerequisities of industrial development
were manifest, and the comparative willingness of the state to provide a
business vehicle that would facilitate the accumulation of the vast sums of
capital required is readily comprehensible in that light.** Since in these cases
incorporation and public benefit were intimately linked, it was also accepted
that there should be a measure of state control to ensure that private interest
was not allowed to predominate over the public good. In the case of the
railways this included a power to revise fares where excessive profits were
made and even in some circumstances an express right to take the undertak-
ing into state ownership.’ Again, however, with the arrival of general

% Cooke, ibid. at 49. See also Hurst, The Legitimacy of the Business Corporation (above, n. 88),
al 4.

% Cooke, ibid. at 78. Petitions for incorporation were scrutinized in the light of public policy
criteria: ibid. at g2 and 118, See also Hurst, ibid. ch. 1.

* In other cases obtaining a charter remained problematical, in part because of the fear of
economic crisis arising from speculation in shares which persisted beyond the South Sea Bubble
affair and the passage of the Bubble Act of 1720. A. B. Dubois, The English Business Company after
the Bubble Act, 1720-1800 (1938), at 12, notes that ‘not only were the operations of unincorporated
joint stock companies restricted by the [Bubble] Act, but the Act was used as an expression of
policy to restrain the formation of business corporations.’ For a similar reluctance in the United
States to grant charters of incorporation to manufacturing enterprises, sec P. I. Blumberg,
‘Limited Liability and Corporate Groups’, (1986) 11 7 Corp L 573, at 587-91.

9% As A. Chayes, “The Modern Corporation and The Rule of Law’ in Mason, The Corporation
in Modern Society (above, n. 76), at 34, puts it: ‘the objects pursued are beyond the reach of the
members as individuals. The needed amounts of capital are too great, the risk is too high, the
duration of the enterprise too long’.

97 See Cooke, Corporation, Trust and Company (above, n. 89), at 135-7; Atiyah, The Rise and Fall
of Freedom of Contract (above, n. 88), at 562. (There are some obvious parallels in the modern
regulatory controls over privatized utilitics, though these are of course not linked to corporate
status: see generally, C. Graham and T. Prosser, Privatizing Public Enterprises (1991).) Similar
provisions applied in the case of American utility companies. For example, the charters of
transport companies provided for the regulation of tolls and made the provision of services over
specified routes a condition of the right to operate: see Hurst, The Legitimacy of the Business
Corporation (above, n. 88), at 39. Note also the position in Germany, where until general

9ZO0Z Yue 90 UO Jesn Ayeigt] ON Aq 9o9PSSZPI/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOG/WOO dno‘o|wepece//:sdyy Woy pepeojumog
30 Corporate Power

incorporation on registration the idea of public benefit as a specific precondi-
tion of corporate status disappeared. Instead, consonant with the prevailing
economic orthodoxy, the public interest became at most a background
justification for the free availability of incorporation and limited liability.
This would serve the general welfare by facilitating the development of
large-scale business enterprises, which, if left alone to pursue their own
interests, would also further the interests of society. There was no longer any
understanding that in making available advantages to private individuals
the state was at the same time imposing a ‘trust’ that the business be
conducted for the public good.

In modern conditions the only remaining peg on which to hang the
concession theory’s claim that the state has a special right of intervention in
company affairs is the idea that since separate personality and limited
liability are benefits conferred by the state, the state is entitled to intervene
to safeguard the public interest as a quid pro quo. But that argument is
difficult to sustain. For one thing, it is not at all clear that in offering the
facility of doing business in corporate form the state is performing a service
materially different from the service it provides in making available and
enforcing the rules of contract, which supports no such argument. But in any
event, the argument makes a disproportionate claim, or may even involve a
non sequitur. Thus, while the conferment of limited liability undoubtedly
warrants the imposition of statutory safeguards to prevent its abuse, it does
not provide an adequate foundation for a general right of intervention in
corporate affairs, unrelated to creditor protection.** Nor do the other at-
tributes of incorporation suggest a basis on which a more extensive right of
intervention on public-interest grounds could be justified in the case of a
company, than of, say, a partnership, simply in virtue of their respective legal
characteristics.

The answer to all of this is surely that it is not the legal qualities of limited
liability or separate personality in themselves that justify intervention, but
the concentration of power in private hands that has come about partly as a
result of their existence.°® The right to intervene does not, in other words,

incorporation became available in 1870, the government had a right to place a representative
on the management body: see D. Vagts, ‘Reforming the ‘Modern’ Corporation: Perspectives
from the German’, (1966) 80 Harv L Rev 23, at 50-51.

88 Cf. Lord Wedderburn, ‘The Social Responsibility of Companies’, (1985) 15 Melbourne U L
Rev 4, at g: ‘the crucial question for our company law’ is still ‘[w]hat are the modern ...
conditions on which private capital in a mixed economy can be allowed the privilege of

incorporation with limited liability’. See also Wedderburn Company Law Reform (above, n. 76), at

a~-3 and 19.

99 For a view questioning the conventional wisdom that limited liability has been of central
importance in the development of the company, see R. E. Meiners, J. J. Mofsky, and R. D.
Tollison, ‘Piercing the Veil of Limited Liability’, (1979) 4 Del 7 Corp L 351. Cf. P. Halpern, M.
‘Trebilcock, and S. Turnbull, ‘An Economic Analysis of Limited Liability in Corporation Law’,
(1980) 30 U Toronto L F 117; F H. Easterbrook and D. R. Fischel, ‘Limited Liability and the

9Z0Z YONI QO UO 4asn Ayeiqiy ON Aq 9O09PSSZPL/JoIdeYUD/2 /Ez/OOq/WON'dno‘sIwWapede//:sdyy Wo pepeojumog
Corporate Power 31

depend on any particular characterization of the state’s role in corporate
creation. Nor is it determined by contemporary attitudes towards the terms
on which corporate status is made available. It relies instead on a political
theory about the legitimacy of private power and the conditions subject to
which that power may be exercised: a theory contending that power may be
legitimately held only for the purpose of furthering the public good. The
reason for this somewhat laboured refutation of the concession theory is to
emphasize that the social enterprise concept does not in any way depend
upon it. It shows further that since the social enterprise concept does not rely
on a special characterization of the role of the state in corporate existence,
then even if the contract theory provides a more descripively accurate
account, no threat to the concept is entailed. It thus does not follow from the
inappropriateness of the concession theory in modern conditions that we
must accept the normative conclusions of the contract theory. It should
instead be recognized that the concession/contract debate is a distraction,
artificially confining the discussion to the company’s supposed public or
private origins. In truth, the fact that a position of power might be attained
as a result of ‘private’'®° contracting in itself says nothing about the legitimacy
of the possession of that power, and hence, even if the company could be

Corporation’, (1985) 52 U Chi L Rev 89, reproduced with revisions in F. H. Easterbrook and D.
R. Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law (1991), ch. 2. See also J. Hicks, ‘Limited
Liability: the Pros and Cons’, in A. Orhnial (ed.), Lamited Liability and the Corporation (1982) 1.

100 Even where the company is understood as constituted entirely through contract the state
is still profoundly implicated in corporate existence (as it is in all business forms), since the
viability of the company depends on state enforcernent of the constitutive contracts and support
for the underlying private property regime. Viewed from this perspective, our question about
the legitimacy of private power can be rephrased as a question about the justifiability of the
state’s upholding a system of private power. Whichever way the question is posed, the need for
justification is not dependent on regarding the state as playing some ‘special’ part in corporate
creation. For a similar idea see the discussion of the ‘sovereign coercion theory’ in Bratton, “The
‘Nexus of Contracts” Corporation’, (above, n. 76) at 438-439. This holds that since all
contracts ultimately depend on state coercion, they are never fully private, but represent an
exercise of delegated state power. This will frequently be of little significance, but where
contracting leads to an accumulation of power in private hands the delegation has public
consequences and the state is accordingly entitled to demand accountability. See also Millon,
‘Theories of the Corporation’ (above, n. 88), at 261. A consequence of this approach is that,
since it views the state as already bound up in private power structures, state intervention
cannot be depicted as an alien interference, but should be seen instead a modification of the
terms of the original delegation. For a general discussion of the possibility of ‘pure’ contract,
that is, binding agreement based entirely on consent and without state intervention, see G. M.
Hodgson, Ecomomics and Institutions (1988), at 156-167. See also the discussion and references in
M. J. Horwitz, ‘The History of the Public/Private Distinction, (1982) 130 U Pa L Rev 1423, and
G. E. Frug, “The Ideology of Bureaucracy in American Law’, (1984) 97 Harv L Rev 1276, at
1363-4. On the public/private distinction generally, from a critical legal studies perspective, see
K. E. Klare, who argues that ‘the social function of the public/private distinction is to repress
aspirations for alternative political arrangements’ in “The Public/Private Distinction in Labor
Law’, (1982) 130 U Pa L Rev 1358, at 1361. See also R. H. Mnookin, ‘The Public/Private
Dichotomy: Political Disagreement and Academic Repudiation’, ibid. at 1429.

9Z0Z YON 90 UO Jesn Ayesgiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Me]deUD/2/7/400qG/WoOd dno‘oWwapede//:sdyjy WoO papeojuMog
32 Corporate Power

explained in purely contractual terms this would, without more,'® have little
impact on the question of the propriety of state intervention.

As it is, the company cannot in any case be accounted for as a wholly
contractual phenomenon. ‘The distinctive attributes of the company, separate
legal personality and limited liability, are beyond the reach of private
agreement.'” Furthermore, while the corporate constitution has a partially
contractual basis, there are also significant mandatory elements, and many
of those ingredients which are attributable to private ordering are more
accurately described as resulting from management imposition than a process
of contracting.'" We will see later that a model of the company infused with
the imagery of contract, suggesting negotiation and mutually. beneficial
exchange, or at least optimal, market-induced equilibria, supports a different
analytical and evaluative approach to current corporate governance arrange-
ments from one which views those arrangements as partially shaped by
management power, but that is a different debate from the one in which we
are currently engaged. The scope of the present debate will now be expanded
by examining whether there are more substantial grounds than those so far
considered for regarding companies as ‘private’ bodies.

Shareholder Rights and Corporate Legitimacy
Under this heading some arguments will be considered to the effect that

0! Tt may be an element in a more substantial argument: see below.

2 This has presented contract theorists with some difficulty. As Posner explains, limited
liability can be achieved without the assistance of statute as against contractual creditors by
writing appropriate terms into all contracts. Since parties are (theoretically) free to refuse to
enter into contracts with limited liability companies, they can be regarded as consenting to the
company’s status and hence the conferment of limited liability by statute can be seen simply as a
device to minimize transaction costs. Posner admits, however, that ‘the contract analogy breaks
down’ as regards tort liability (above n. 8), at 372. R. Hessen, Jn Defense of the Corporation
(1979), at 18-21, attempts to provide a ‘private’ explanation of limited liability for torts by
invoking the aggregate theory of corporate existence: it is a mistake to view a company as an
entity distinct from its members, and hence where an employee commits a tort (on this view the
company itself cannot behave tortiously, or in any other way, since it does not exist) it is not the
entity that is vicariously liable, but the shareholders. Since passive investors have no control
over employees, however, they should be immune from action and it is this that accounts for
their individual limited liability. Whatever the rhetorical force of this argument it is incorrect as
a piece of legal analysis. No shareholders, passive or otherwise, are vicariously liable in tort (a
shareholder involved in management may be personally liable), and ail shareholders are indirectly
liable up to the nominal valuc of their shares. See also D. R. Fischel: ‘The Corporate
Governance Movement’, (1982) 35 Vand L Rev 1259, at 1274. While acknowledging that with
respect to tort ‘corporations have attributes that would not exist absent state statutes’ he insists
that ‘this does not make corporations creatures of the state. Limited liability in tort cases is more
accurately viewed as a subsidy to encourage a certain type of private conduct, forming
corporations ..., than as a creation of the conduct itself’. Surely the most straightforward
explanation is the best: limited liability is a state-conferred benefit (as Fischel admits) but this
does not have the normative implications for which the concession theory contends.

103 See M. A. Eisenberg, “The Structure of Corporation Law’, (1989) 89 Colum L Rev 1461, at

1471,

9Z0Z YON QO UO Jesn AJeigiq ON Aq go9PSSZPL/eIdeUD// /€7/4OOG/WoN'dno‘slWwapede//:sdyy WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 33

corporate power can be legitimated by reference to the rights of the corpora-
tors. If this proposition is valid, our insistence that companies should be
regarded as social enterprises is undermined. The idea that society is entitled
to take whatever steps may be considered necessary to ensure that companies
serve the public interest depends on the theory that the only basis on which
companies can be allowed to possess power, which effectively means the only
basis on which large companies can be allowed to exist, is that they produce
consequences beneficial to society. The theories now examined offer an
alternative, non-consequentialist justification of corporate power, and argue
that the exclusive concern of company law should be to protect the rights of
the relevant rights-holders.

A Revised Contract Theory

A possible response to the dismissal of contract as a ground of corporate
legitimacy is that it pays insufficient attention to the moral significance of
contract. Is not the act of contracting an exercise of the parties’ moral rights,
with the effect that the outcome of the contracting, the company, is legiti-
mated by reference to those rights? Put another way, in so far as companies
have power, is not that power justifiable on the basis that those who exercise
it can claim a moral right to do so? Expressed in these terms the contract theory
does not merely (irrelevantly) emphasize the company’s non-state origins, it
also offers a political justification for the possession of private power. Arguing
along these lines, Hessen asserts that ‘men have a natural right to form a cor-
poration by contract for their own benefit, welfare, and mutual self-interest’ .!°*
More particularly, he contends that a company is the result of an exercise of free-
dom of association and freedom of contract.! On this basis it could be argued
that companies should indeed be regarded as purely private organizations,
and that state intervention in their internal affairs constitutes an improper
interference with the moral rights of the participants. It is suggested, however,
that corporate power cannot be legitimated merely by reference to the rights
cited by Hessen. The foundation of a company’s power is its control over
property, and the claim of the members to be entitled to exercise that power
or to delegate it to representatives rests on their rights as owners.'°* Without
access to property, the freedom of the parties to associate with one another and
to make agreements would be of little practical significance in this context.

A Property Rights Theory

A credible justification of corporate enterprise in terms of rights must,

'* Hessen, Jn Defense of the Corporation (above, n. 102), at 22.

105 |bid. at xiv.

6 It is theoretically possible for a company to function without an initial endowment of
equity capital and instead to rely entirely on borrowings, but property rights (in this case those
of the lender) nevertheless remain central.

9Z0Z YON 90 UO Jesn Ayesgiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Me]deUD/2/7/400qG/WoOd dno‘oWwapede//:sdyjy WoO papeojuMog
34 Corporate Power

therefore, be based on rights of ownership.'*? A property rights justification
might take the following general form. While shareholders are not the
owners of the company’s assets as a matter of strict law,' they are in
substance the owners by virtue of being the contributors of the company’s
capital. Owners are entitled to use their property in whatever ways they
wish. It follows that the power that results when shareholders pool their
resources in corporate form 1s legitimate, because in possessing and exercising
it they are doing only what they have a right to do. Accordingly it is not
necessary, in order to establish that corporate power is legitimate, to show
that the existence of companies is conducive to the general welfare, and the
state has no right to intervene in their affairs in the name of the public good
other than by the traditional means of altering the background legal
constraints within which all businesses and citizens must operate. Before
evaluating this argument two preliminary objections will be noted.

The first is that the corporate constitution does not provide that the
members shall decide how the business is run, but vests decision-making power
in the directors and managers. Not only that, if we accept that there has
been a divorce between ownership and control in the typical large
company,'!® then management has escaped effective shareholder supervision
and hence possesses a broad discretion as to the ends for which the company’s
power shall be used. The objection therefore is that since power and property

'o7 See Eisenberg, ‘Corporate Legitimacy, Conduct, and Governance’ (above, n. 77) at 5,
who suggests that ‘in our society control soley by virtue of ownership — hands-on or hands-off
— is a fully legitimating principle.’ It should be noted, however, that in making this statement
he adopts an empirical, rather than a normative, concept of legitimacy (see note 77, above),
and hence avoids consideration of the justificatory force of a property rights argument.

108 For a consideration of whether corporate assets should be classified as a form of private
property of the shareholders see J. Waldron, The Right to Private Property (1988), at 57-59.

109 Tt can be argued that it is a mistake to regard sharehalders as owners at all: they are mere
investors, and in so far as company law gives shareholders rights akin to those of owners it fails
to reflect the complex reality of the modern large company, ignoring in the process the claims of
such groups as employees, consumers and the local community to have a voice in decisions
about how the company is run. Because these interests are excluded., the argument runs,
corporate power is exercised illegitimately. There is no need for an attempt to resolve this issue
here, since it will be suggested below that even if the shareholders can be regarded as the
company’s owners, their legal rights of property do not in themselves provide an adequate
moral foundation for their position within the company. For a non-radical version of the
‘shareholders are not owners’ argument, see Goyder, The Responsible Company (above, n. 66), ch.
12. It is interesting to note in this connection that the German Constitutional Court has held
that the shareholders’ rights are rights of membership in an organization and not direct rights
over property (with the effect that the statutory rights of participation in management granted
to employees do not infringe constitutional guarantees of private property): see T. Hadden,
‘Employee Participation - What Future for the German Model?’ (1982) 3 Co Law 250, at 252.
Advocates of the modern ‘nexus of contracts’ theory of the company also do not regard the
members as owners, though in their case this proposition is not usually relied on to downgrade
the members’ right to have the company operated exclusively in their interests: see the
discussion in Ch. 6 below.

110 See Ch. 2 below.

9Z0Z YOueW QO UO Jesn Ayeiqry ON Aq gO09PSSZPL/JeIdeY9// /Ez/OOqG/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyY Woy pepeojumog
Corporate Power 39

have separated, the legitimating link between them has been broken. As
against this, it is possible to argue that corporate power, as exercised by
management, is still ultimately rooted in, and hence legitimated by, property
rights, on the ground that the structure that gives rise to it 1s created with
the consent of the shareholders.'!! The members’ rights of ownership entitle
them not only to make decisions personally about how their property is to be
used, but also to delegate that power to others, and they are free to stipulate
what degree of control they require over the discretion ceded by them. The
validity of this reasoning ultimately depends, it is suggested, on the genuine-
ness of the shareholders’ consent to the resulting situation. If the reality is
that. through the inadequacies of the governance structure and of other
pressures for conformity the directors have effectively wrested power to
pursue goals which diverge from those preferred by the shareholders, then
the necessary legitimating connection with property rights is not made out.
Whether corporate boards have escaped shareholder control will be
considered in Chapter 2 below.

The second objection ts that the ownership justification erroneously as-
sumes that property rights are absolute. The justification supposes that so
long as a person is possessed ofa right, that right may be exercised regardless
of the consequences for others. But it can be argued that we should not view
rights in this way, and that when their use has adverse effects on third
parties, rights should not be treated as signifying a moral entitlement in the
right-holder to bring about those effects. The harm resulting from corporate
discretion might lie in its impact on particular individuals or groups, or it
might exist at a more abstract level, in the social dishgurement that the
concentration of power in a small number of hands represents. If the position
of power that comes about when shareholders combine their property in a
company is damaging in either of these ways, then an invocation of owner-
ship rights will not constitute a conclusive justification. Now the purpose
of relying on a rights-based argument is frequently to claim an entitlement
to act irrespective of the consequences for others, and so if the idea of
rights is to be coherent we must accept that a freedom to act in the face
of at least some adverse social outcomes is entailed.''? If this is so then the
issue should be formulated as one of whether the existence of corporate
power 1s sufficiently objectionable to defeat the prima facie justificatory
force of a rights’ claim.

1! See, e.g. Hessen, Jn Defense of the Corporation (above, n. 102), at xiii. It should be noted also
that there is a second-order legitimacy question concerning the legitimacy of the exercise of
shareholder rights by the controllers (who are not themselves owners) of institutional funds,
which now hold a large proportion of British equities: see further 166-7, below.

"2 See R. Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously, (2nd ed., 1978), ch. 7. See also A. Sen, ‘The
Moral Standing of the Market’, in E. F. Paul, F. D. Miller and J. Paul (eds), Ethics and Economics
(1985) 1.

9Z0Z YON 90 UO Jesn Ayesgiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Me]deUD/2/7/400qG/WoOd dno‘oWwapede//:sdyjy WoO papeojuMog
36 Corporate Power

It is not clear how this issue could be resolved, other than by stipulation,'’*

and hence rather than attempt to reach a conclusion we will proceed to the
more fundamental question of whether the shareholders should, in the first
place, be considered to have a moral right to decide how companies should
be run in virtue of their ownership of corporate property.''* If the fact of
ownership does not carry with it a moral right of control, then the property
rights justification of corporate power collapses and the objection in the
previous paragraph (and the one before) becomes irrelevant. Much of the
theoretical literature in company law treats property rights as though they
were unproblematical; they are the unquestioned starting points of analysis
rather than artefacts whose existence and distribution themselves demand
justification. This truncated approach is unsatisfactory, and so the discussion
that follows will explore the grounds on which ownership of corporate
property might be thought morally to entitle shareholders to exercise power,
and, more realistically, to delegate that right to management. Needless to
say, a full-scale review of the moral justification of private property will
not be undertaken, but enough will be said to indicate that there are
substantial difficulties in the way of providing a satisfactory justification of
corporate power by reference to the shareholders’ supposed moral owner-
ship rights.

Historical Entitlements

A well-established tradition holds owners to be morally entitled to their
property when they have obtained it by way of an uncoerced transfer from
someone who received it in a similar manner, subject to the property having
been originally taken into private ownership by a legitimate process of
acquisition. The latter requirement necessitates showing that the person who
first removed the property from the ‘common store’ was entitled to do so; it
must then be demonstrated that subsequent transfers have been consensual.
Locke explains how property rights are intitially obtained by reference to the
labour expended on the property by the acquirer.''® Nozick, the most recent
exponent of entitlement theory,'® does not discuss the precise requirements
for a morally just acquisition, but asserts that since taking property into
private ownership will not in general prejudice the interests of others (he
argues that their welfare will be increased owing to the greater efficiency of

113 "Phe issue is not whether the use of property conflicts with clearly recognized ‘background
constraints’ (e.g. ownership of a knife does not entitle the owner to stab someone with it: see
Waldron, The Right to Private Property (above, n. 108), at 32~33), but a more intractable one of
identifying when otherwise acceptable exercises of rights become unacceptable because of the
position of power that is thereby created.

114 Te, it will be assumed that the shareholders do in substance own the assets employed in
the business.

15 J. Locke, Two Treatises of Government (1690).

46 R, Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia (1974).

9Z0Z YON 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq go9PSSZPL/JeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WOd dno‘oIWwepede//:Ssdy}y WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 37

an economy based on private property),'’’ a taking will normally be morally
legitimate.''® The problem faced by all versions of entitlement theory,
however, is in demonstrating why acquirers should be rewarded for their
efforts with full rights of private ownership.''? We might accept, for instance,
that labouring on property should give the labourer some preferential
interest in it (for example, a right to the value added by the work done), but
it is not self-evident that any particular set of more extensive rights is
warranted. The success of entitlement theory depends, however, on showing
precisely that. Since historical entitlement theorists make original acquisition
the root of all subsequent entitlements, it is essential that they demonstrate
that acquisition is an event of sufficient moral significance to bestow on the
acquirer all the incidents of private ownership, including the right to transfer
the property at will and to confer the same package of rights on all
subsequent transferees. Some quality of original acquisition must, in other
words, provide a justification for the perpetual privatization of property and
the consequent denial of its use to third parties. But rather than meet this
challenge, entitlement theorists simply take for granted that if original
acquirers deserve any rights they deserve the full rights of liberal ownership,
and hence they assume, rather than demonstrate, the legitimacy of that
which has to be justified: the institution of private property.’?? Entitlement
theory therefore offers no satisfactory justification of private property in
general, and hence, for the purposes of our more limited enquiry, establishes
no moral basis for shareholder control over corporate property in particular.

Property Rights and Freedom
A different way of justifying private property is by reference to a supposed

"7 For a cogent criticism of this proposition, see G. A. Cohen, ‘Nozick on Appropriation’,
(1985) 150 New Left Rev 89.

18 Where there has been an injustice in acquisition or transfer, Nozick accepts the need for
‘rectification’, that is, return of property to the rightful owner, or descendant thereof, or the
payment of appropriate compensation: see Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia (above, n. 116), at
150-3. If taken seriously, such a right would entirely destabilize current property holdings,
given historic irregularities in transfers. Wholesale rectification does not, of course, take place
and hence it would seem to follow that most property holdings, including holdings of corporate
property, should on this view be regarded as morally impeachable: see R. A. Dahl A Preface to
Economic Democracy (1985), at 77.

"9 For an analysis of these rights, see A. Honoré, ‘Ownership’, in A. G. Guest (ed.) Oxford
Essays in Jurisprudence (1961), 107.

120 Sec e.g. A. Honoré, ‘Property, Title and Redistribution’, in Honoré, Making Law Bind
(1987); C. C. Ryan, “Yours, Mine and Ours: Property Rights and Individual Liberty’ in J. Paul
(ed.), Reading Nozick, (1981) 323; Waldron, The Right to Private Property (above, n. 108), chs 6
and 7. J. Gray, Liberalism (1986), at 63, a sympathetic commentator, writes that ‘[i]t can fairly
be said that no adequate theory of initial acquisition exists ...°. The same difficulties are not
faced by justifications of private property that do not makc original acquisition carry the whole
weight of justification, The utilitarian account of ownership, for example, relies on original
acquisition to set the system in motion, but regards private property’s welfare-maximizing
consequences as its legitimating basis.

9Z0Z YOueW QO UO Jesn Ayeiqi7 ON Aq g09PSESZHL/JeIdeyD///6z/4Ooq/WON'dno's1Wwapede//:sdyYy Wo pepeojuMog
38 Corporate Power

dependence of individual freedom on the existence of a private property
system. Hayek claims, for instance, that ‘a people averse to the institution of
private property is without the first element of freedom’.'*! The point is not
that everyone needs property to be free; some people have little or no property
but are not necessarily any the less free as a result. The freedom that a
private-property system brings is not the freedom ¢o do things with property,'””
but freedom from coercion, and this does not depend on property being
owned by all. The connection between the existence of a system of private
property and freedom is that the former enables each individual to construct
a “private sphere’, rendering him or herself safe from coercive interference by
others. Where there is private property the actions of individuals cannot be
‘shaped at will by another’'” because the individual is able to form a
coherent plan of action in the knowledge either that he has control, through
ownership, of the material objects necessary to implement it, or that he can
enter into enforceable contracts with a range of other people enabling him to
have access to those objects. What is crucial, then, is not that a particular
individual should necessarily own property himself, but that ‘property should
be sufficiently dispersed so that the individual is not dependent on particular
persons who alone can provide him with what he needs or who alone can
employ him’.'** The chief virtue of a private property system is that it
achieves this dispersal and ts therefore structurally antagonistic to coercion.
The problem with this reasoning is that even if we accept the narrow
definition of freedom on which it relies,'* a system of private property, and in
particular private ownership of productive assets, is not the only property
system that is capable of bringing about the required dispersal of control
over material goods. Monolithic state ownership is not the sole alternative to
private property; productive assets can, for example, be owned in common
by the members of a cooperative, no individual member having a transferable
property right in them.'”¢ In such systems it is entirely feasible for there to be

21 Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (above, n. 30), at 140, quoting Lord Acton, The History of
Freedom and Other Essays (1907), at 297.

122 Hayek denies that this positive characterization of freedom is a form of freedom at all;
rather, it is a confusion of freedom with the ability to act. Furthermore it is, according to him, a
dangerous confusion, since it ‘leads to the identification of liberty with wealth; and this makes it
possible to exploit all the appeal which the word “liberty” carries in the support of a demand
for the redistribution of wealth’: ibid. at 17. Justification of property by reference to what
ownership allows an individual to do is of obvious appeal. As the quotation makes clear,
however, this route is not open to Hayek, since it begs the question of why the benefits of
ownership should be unevenly distributed.

23 Vbid. at 21.

4 Tbid. at 141.

125 The concept of freedom is a highly contested one; for an introduction to some of the
arguments see A. R. White, Rights (1984), ch. 9.

26 For further discussion, see Ch. 7 below. For a discussion of some other examples of non-
private ownership involving dispersed holdings, see Honoré, ‘Property, Tithe and Redistribution’
(above, n, 120) .

9Z0Z YOJeW 90 UO Jesn Areign ON Aq 9O097ESZPL/Je}deUD/2 /EzOOg/WOD dno‘s}Wepede//:sdyY WO papeojuMoq
Corporate Power 39

a plurality of owning or controlling groups, thus preventing any particular
group from having a monopoly over goods or employment opportunities that
would enable it to exercise coercion. Private property and freedom are not
uniquely connected in the way that Hayek suggests, therefore, and if private
property is to be justified in terms of freedom some further argument is
required that the dispersal theory does not supply.'*’

Rights Protecting Interests

Rather than justifying private property by reference to its role in creating a
‘free society’, emphasis can be placed on the part played by ownership in
securing vital human interests. This latter approach, unlike the previous one,
depends on all individuals actually owning some property, and not merely
the background existence of private property as an institution. Waldron
refers to a justification of property along these lines as a right-based argument
for private property, which he defines as ‘an argument which takes an
individual interest to be sufficiently important in itself to justify holding
others (especially the government) to be under duties to create, secure,
maintain, or respect an institution of private property’.'!?? We might claim,
for instance, to have a right to life because we each have an interest in being
alive that is of sufficient importance to Justify holding others to be under a
duty to respect our lives, and the government to be under a corresponding
obligation to reinforce that duty by enacting appropriate laws. Similarly, we
might claim to have a right to private property on account of having
interests which crucially depend on private ownership. One such interest
might be autonomy, the rights of exclusive use and alienation inherent in
private property enabling individuals to organize their affairs without the
need to obtain the permission of others. Alternatively, private ownership
might be necessary for our full development as moral agents, for instance, in

27 A utilitarian justification of private property, postulating optimal efficiency from an
economic system founded on private property and thus the maximization of welfare, may be
easier to sustain. It is suggested, however, that a utilitarian theory of individual property rights
cannot provide a stable basis for a justification of corporate power. It does not follow that
because the individual ownership of assets is justified by virtue of its consequences that an
institution in which those assets are pooled (a company) would similarly be justified. It may be,
for instance, that where assets are aggregated the efficiency which justifies individual property
holdings is fatally diminished (perhaps because of the need to employ non-owning managers), or
that the positive consequences in terms of efficiency are outweighed by the negative effects of the
resulting accumulation of power. In other words, a consequentialist argument will be persuasive
only where it is targeted directly at the institution that is to be justified. A consequentialist
justification of the company will be considered below.

28 Waldron, The Right to Private Property (above, n. 108), at 115. The theories of Locke and
Nozick discussed above are right-based, but take the form of what Waldron calls a special-right-
based argument (see ibid. at 116). This is an argument which takes an interest as being
sufficiently important to justify holding others to be under a duty, etc., on account of the
occurrence of some particular event, in the case of the theories of Locke and Nozick, original
acquisition. The discussion that follows is concerned with general-right-based arguments, which
focus on the nature of the interest itself.

9Z0Z YONeV\| 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/MeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WON dno‘olWwapede//:Sdy}y WO. papeojuMog
40 Corporate Power

order to foster a sense of responsibility and prudence.'?® These arguments are
attractive, and might well justify private property in personal possessions,
and also such productive assets as may be needed for the satisfactory
fulfilment of an individual’s human potential. It is difficult to see, however,
what interests we might have of the necessary importance whose realization
depends on owning corporate property. And once we take notice that in
reality individual holdings in companies, other than in exceptional cases,
give the holder negligible rights of control, it becomes clear that ownership of
corporate property could make no distinctive contribution to the realization
of whatever individual interests might be specified.

Conclusion: Back to Social Enterprises

This brief survey reveals some of the difficulties of establishing that sharehold-
ers are morally entitled to control companies by virtue of their legal property
rights, and hence of attempting to legitimate corporate power by reference to
those rights. If shareholders cannot be shown to have an antecedent moral
right to the control over corporate property that their legal rights give them,
then the property rights justification of corporate power must fail, and with
it the project of explaining companies as private shareholder domains. It
should be added that it does not follow from this conclusion that shareholders
do not have any interest in the company that merits protection on the basis of
moral rights. In arguing that shareholders do not have moral rights of
control, it has not been necessary to contend that they have no rights at all.
The right to a return (not necessarily the highest possible return) on their
investment may, for example, be supportable on the basis of moral rights.
Nor does the rejection of justificatory theories of corporate power based on
antecedent rights signify that the full set of legal rights in the company
possessed by the shareholders, including the right to exercise ultimate control
and to have the business operated in their interests, are not morally defensible.
If, as will be considered in the next section, companies serve the public
interest by seeking to maximize their profits, then the shareholders’ rights
may be justifiable on functional grounds, that is, by virtue of their role in
securing the efficient operation of the business.'*° But the significance of a

129 See S. R. Munzer, A Theory of Property (1990), ch. 6.

1380 This idea of the contingent status of sharcholder rights also appears in E. M. Dodd, ‘For
Whom Are Corporate Managers Trustees?’ (1932) 45 Harv L Rev 1145, at 1149 (part of the
celebrated Berle-Dodd debate), where Dodd observes that ‘business is permitted and encouraged
by the law primarily because it is of service to the community rather than because it is a source
of profit to its owners.’ He goes on to state that if businesses continue to be allowed unregulated
profits ‘it will be as a matter of legislative policy because the lawmakers regard the competitive
conditions under which such businesses are carried on as making regulation of profits unneces-
sary, and not because the owners of such enterprises have any constitutional right to have their
property treated as private in the sense in which property held merely for personal use is
private’.

9Z0Z YOueW 90 UO Jesn Ayeigiy ON Aq gO09PSSZPL/Je}deYUD// /Ez/4OOqG/WON'dno'sIWwepede//:sdyy WO pepeojumog
Corporate Power 4]

justification in terms of consequences rather than rights is that the sharehold-
ers’ position is dependent on a positive evaluation of consequences. If,
therefore, the single-minded pursuit of profits (as constrained by external
regulation) is liable to damage the public interest, then this will require a
modification of the existing set of shareholder rights and the framework of
company law that upholds them. Since, according to the argument above,
the rights of the shareholders are not foundational, the necessary reforms
may legitimately be undertaken.

Now that the objection based on shareholder rights to viewing companies
as social enterprises has been removed, we can proceed to a provisional
account of the objectives companies should be required to adopt if they are
to serve the public interest. If the existence of companies should be regarded
as premised on ‘the understanding that their activities are to fulfill our
purposes’,'3! some idea of how ‘our purposes’ should be understood is
needed.

IV COMPANIES AND THE CREATION OF SOCIAL WEALTH

What criteria should guide corporate decision making if companies are to
serve the public interest? A useful starting point is to note the traditional
justification of capitalism in terms of consequences (as distinct from rights).
This is that capitalism, and now its modern form of large-scale corporate
capitalism, is the most efficient (practically realizable) system for the creation
of wealth.'*? According to economic theory, with some reservations that will
be examined shortly, companies contribute to the maximization of society’s
total wealth when they seek to maximize their own profits. If, therefore, we
were to equate the public interest, so far as relevant to the operation of
business, with the maximization of the wealth of society as a whole, it would
follow that in order to serve the public interest companies should be required
to pursue the goal of profit maximization: maximum profitability should be
the sole criterion that guides management discretion and the exercise by
companies of social decision-making power.

Unconstrained profit maximization is not, however, conducive to the public
interest, or at least any easily defended conception of it, for two reasons.
First, while the efficient creation of wealth may be regarded as a high social
priority, we also recognize individual and collective interests and values that
ought not to be sacrificed in its pursuit. Such recognition is reflected, for
instance, in the enhancement by statute of the rights of employees against
dismissal, which from an aggregate wealth viewpoint may be depicted as

'3! Dahl, ‘A Prelude to Corporate Reform’ (above, n. 76), at 17 (emphasis in original).
182 See e.g. P. L. Berger, The Capztalist Revolution (1987), ch. 2.

9Z0Z YON 90 UO Jesn AJeugiq ON Aq 9o9PSSZPL/Me}deUD/2/¢7/400qG/WoOd dno‘olWwapede//:sdyjy WoO papeojuMog
42 Corporate Power

inhibiting factor mobility and hence on occasion as being wealth-reducing.
Second, because of defects inherent in the operation of markets, the strict
maximization of profits will in any case frequently fail to lead to the
maximization of aggregate wealth. An example is the problem of ‘externali-
ties’. This is the problem that behaviour which is privately profitable will not
be wealth-maximising overall where an actor can ignore the costs that its
activities impose on others, for example, when a company without cost to
itself can emit into the atmosphere the noxious by-products of its production
methods.'*? Society seeks to rectify the effects of this divergence of private
and social interests by imposing limits or prohibitions on certain kinds of
emissions or on the use of polluting processes; other techniques, such as
taxing the production of harmful wastes, are also available to force companies
to ‘internalize’ the full costs of their activities.

The imposition of legislative constraints on profit maximization can,
therefore, be viewed as a procedure for adjusting, in the public interest, the
terms on which wealth is created. If this procedure is the most appropriate
way of correcting market failure and of otherwise setting the requisite
‘sociopolitical limits on the exercise of economic rationality’!** then it would
seem to follow that the goal of companies should continue to be profit
maximization, within the relevant constraints. To the extent that maximising
profits conflicts with the public interest, the solution from this perspective is
not to modify corporate objectives, but to strengthen the limiting conditions
within which companies are required to operate. In this way society benefits
from the most efficient means of producing wealth, consistent with the
protection of non-aggregative social values. It follows from this reasoning
that a company law focused on the public interest should define management
duties exclusively in terms of profit maximization and should more generally
provide a legal framework orientated towards that end.

Dissatisfaction with the ‘profit maximization within the law’ formula is at
the centre of the debate about corporate social responsibility. It can be
argued that the interests of the various groups affected by company decision-
making—employees, local communities, consumers, and all of us, through
our interest in the environment, for example-~are invested with a moral
significance that cannot be adequately captured within the relatively finite
external legal controls that are currently relied on to regulate the terms on
which wealth is created.’%> Accordingly, obedience to the demands of ‘profit

183 Externalities and other examples of market failure will be examined in more detail in Ch.
10 below.

134 KE. Goodpaster, ‘Ethical Imperatives and Corporate Leadership’, in Freeman, Business
Ethics: The State of the Art (above, n. 86), at 98.

138 Ch. 10 below will examine why. A different aspect of the social responsibility debate, also
considered in Ch. 10, is concerned not with action to safeguard the interests of groups affected
by the way the company runs its business, but with corporate involvement in community

9Z0Z Ye 90 UO Jesn Ayesqr] ON Aq 909PSSZrL/e}deYyo///€7/4O0q/Wod'dno'oiwepeoes/:sdyy Woy pepeojumog
Corporate Power 43

maximization within the law’ prevents the full range and texture of third-
party interests from being taken into account or given sufficient weight in
corporate decision-making. For example, whether or not a company should
relocate its head office, creating unemployment and inflicting wide-ranging
economic and social damage on the community from which it proposes to
exit, is not an issue that is resolvable by conventional regulatory techniques.
It is true that ethical values are to some extent also transmitted through
markets, with the effect that a company committed to profit maximization
cannot afford to ignore the impact of its activities on others. Some minimum
level of compliance with societal expectations is, in other words, built into
the profit goal. A business may, for instance, spend more on anti-pollution
measures than is necessary to satisfy the relevant legislation, perhaps to avoid
adverse publicity which may damage sales. But so long as the company’s
objective is maximum profits, a concern with the welfare of third parties 1s
necessarily an instrumental one: it is a means of protecting profitability in
the long term. The concept of social responsibility, in contrast, demands that
affected interests be treated as ends in themselves, and this will at times
require a deviation from long-run profit maximization.’

From the standpoint of advocates of social responsibility, therefore, it
should be a function of company law to facilitate the reception and proper
weighting of third-party interests in corporate decision-making, even though
this may require the adoption of policies which are not privately profit-
maximising. As compared with a ‘profit maximization within the law’
regime, this may in some areas lead to outcomes which are more efficient
from a social point of view, as when a company takes voluntary action to
internalize external costs. In other respects it may in principle result in
conduct which is wealth reducing overall, as when a company keeps open an
unproductive plant or retains corparatively expensive local suppliers in order
to protect the host community. Mechanisms by which third-party interests
might be more fully integrated into the corporate decision-making process
will be discussed 1n Chapter 11.

For the time being these issues will be held in suspense, and the following
chapters will examine those aspects of company law which bear on manage-
ment decision-making on the assumption that their aim should be to promote
profit maximization subject only to external legal constraints. Whether this
objective should underlie company law, viewed from a public interest perspec-
tive, or whether the alternative approach just discussed is preferable, will be

projects (e.g. charitable donations and secondment) which are not directly related to the conduct
of the company’s ordinary business affairs.

1386 The term ‘social responsibility’ may, however, also be used without any implication that
there is a conflict between the interests of society and long-run profit maximization: see Ch. g
below.

9Z0Z Yue 90 UO Jesn AyesqiT ON Aq 909PSSZPL/JeIdeYD// Ez/OOq/WON dno‘slwepese//:sdyY Woy papeojumog
44 Corporate Power

considered in Chapters g and 10. Thus, Chapters 2-8 will, among other
things, describe and evaluate the controls on goal selection, the controls
relating to the efficiency with which permitted goals are pursued, and the
controls designed to prevent the diversion of corporate assets to manage-
ment.

Three issues remain for consideration in this chapter. First, it is necessary
to look more closely at the relationship between profit maximization and
ageregate wealth maximization, and to introduce an additional reservation.
Second, it will be examined why, granted the profit maximization objective,
the profits should accrue to the shareholders, as opposed, for example, to the
employees: if considerations of efficiency underscore the shareholders’ current
position of pre-eminence, then this may be thought to provide a justificatory
foundation for shareholder rights within a public-interest framework. Finally,
it has so far been taken for granted that satisfaction of a social objective of
efficient wealth creation is capable of legitimating the existence of corporate
power. The capacity of wealth maximization to legitimate power, however,
requires some elaboration.

The Relationship between Profit Maximization and Wealth Maximization

It will be assumed for present purposes that society’s wealth is maximized
when production takes place at the lowest possible cost, thus avoiding the
waste of scarce resources (the goal of ‘productive efficiency’ is satisfied), and
goods and services are produced in the quantities and are of the quality
demanded by consumers (the goal of ‘allocative efficiency’ is satisfied). There
is an obvious connection between profit maximization and productive ef-
ficiency. A company committed to maximizing its profits will strive to
minimize its costs, and will thus aim to use the resources at its disposal in the
most productive way. The link between profit maximization and allocative
efficiency, on the other hand, is more complex, since profit maximization can
lead to different outcomes depending on the structure of the market in which
the company operates. A profit-maximizing firm under conditions of perfect
competition will expand production up to the point at which the additional
cost of producing the last unit of output (‘marginal cost’) is equal to price.
Once this point has been reached increased production will make no further
contribution to profits. Output at this level is optimal not only for the firm,
but also for society, because the type and quantity of goods produced will
match the demand for them, at least in so far as demand is represented by
the willingness and ability of the consumer to pay.'*” Where this situation
prevails in all industries throughout the economy (that is, price equals
marginal cost for every firm) the distribution of resources between competing

'37 There is no uniquely optimal pattern of output, only patterns which are optimal relative
to existing demand, which is a function of the distribution of wealth: see further below.

9Z0Z YON 9O UO Jesn Ayeugiq ON Aq go9PSSZPL/JeIdeUD// /€7/4OOqG/WOd dno‘oIWwepede//:Ssdy}y WO pepeojuMog
Corporate Power 45

uses is allocatively efficient: the total value of output could not be increased
by distributing resources in some other way.'*8 ‘The pursuit of profits and the
social interest are therefore coincident.

However, as was mentioned earlier in the chapter, the model of perfect
competition does not present an accurate picture of reality. Many industries
are dominated by a small number of large companies; because of their
relative share of the market, the existence of barriers to entry, and the
differentiated character of their products, these companies are not pure
price-takers, but have the ability to increase their prices above marginal cost.
Where firms maximize profits in uncompetitive conditions the effect is that
consumers are denied goods which they would have been willing to buy at
the competitive market price. Output is accordingly lower than it would
have been under conditions of perfect competition, and resources are diverted
to alternative, less valuable uses. Another result is that firms make
‘supernormal’ profits (profits in excess of those necessary to induce them to
remain in the industry) ‘at consumers’ expense. In short, the outcome is
allocatively inefficient: a rearrangement of resources would produce a net
increase in the satisfaction of wants.!%9

It does not necessarily follow from this, however, that an economy in
which large firms predominate is inefficient on balance. In many cases the
large size of a company, which is the source of its market power, may enable
it to make cost savings which, although not fully passed on, more than
compensate for the distorting effects of an uncompetitive market structure.'*
It may therefore be that while a perfectly competitive market composed of
producers big enough to benefit fully from economies of scale would be the
ideal, something like the existing state of affairs, particularly against a
background of merger control and regulation of anti-competitive practices, is
the best realizable outcome.'*! But though this may quell doubts about the

'38 For a more detailed explanation, see Schcrer, Jndustrial Market Structure and Economic
Performance (above, n. 40), ch. 2; Lipsey, Positive Economics (above, n. 39), ch. 12; F. H. Stephen,
The Economics of the Law (1988), ch. 4. Under conditions of perfect competition productive
efficiency is also assured; since all firms are price-takers, those that have higher production costs
than their rivals will be driven out of business,

'89 See Scherer, ibid. ch. 2; Lipsey, ibid. chs 13 and 14; Stephen, ibid. ch. 4. Lack of
competition also gives rise to doubts about productive efficiency: given the weakening of
competitive pressure in companies’ product markets they are no longer forced to adopt the most
cost-effective production methods or management techniques. Cf. M. Olson, ‘On the Priority of
Public Problems’, in R. Marris (ed.), The Corporate Society (1974), 294, at 294-300.

'# See O. E. Williamson, ‘Economies as an Anti-Trust Defense: The Welfare ‘Trade-Offs’,
(1968) 58 Am Econ Rev 18, discussed in A. Hughes, “The Impact of Merger: A Survey of
Empirical Evidence for the UK’ in Fairburn and Kay, Mergers and Merger Policy (above, n. 7)
30, at 31-2.

‘#1 It is also possible, contrary to the traditional view which argues that vigorous competition
provides a strong incentive for companies to innovate, that a market structure which offers some
shelter from competition is more conducive to technological progress, given the costs and risks
associated with research and the development of new products and techniques: see Scherer,
Industrial Market Structure (above, n. 40), at 14 and 22.

9Z0Z YOUe 90 UO Jesn Ayeiqi ON Aq 9O09PSSZPL/Je}deYD/2 /Ez/4OOqG/WON dno‘slWepese//:sdyY WO pepeojuMoG
46 Corporate Power

benefits of the existence of large-scale enterprise, it does not bear on the point
that where competition is attenuated a policy of profit maximization may
not be wealth-maximizing: society might be better served if companies were
to lower price and increase output, even though this would be less profitable
from the company’s point of view.'# This point will, however, be ignored
until Chapter 10, and in the meantime it will be assumed that profit
maximization is in the social interest regardless of the particular market
structure within which the company operates.

Profit Maximization and Shareholder Rights

The fruits of a policy of profit maximization accrue to the shareholders as
dividends and increased share values. What is the logic that dictates that the
shareholders should be entitled to the corporate surplus, rather than to a
fixed return on capital, with profits being distributed to the employees, or
even to management?!” The possibility of a functional justification of the
rights of shareholders was referred to earlier. It is sufficient for present
purposes to note one such justification, the incentive-residual rights theory.'**
Alchian and Demsetz characterize the firm as involving a team use of inputs
together with the occupancy of a central position by a party whose function
is to monitor the outputs of the team members and the other factors of
production employed in the firm.'** Monitoring is necessary in order to limit
the tendency of team members to ‘shirk’, that is, to increase leisure and
reduce effort ‘on the job’. (They explain the existence of the firm by
reference to the superiority of internal monitoring through observation of the

#2 See D. Helm, ‘Mergers, ‘Take-overs, and the Enforcement of Profit Maximization’, in
Fairburn and Kay, Mergers and Merger Policy (above, n. 7), 133.

48 See e.g. Berle and Means, The Modern Corporation (above, n. 76), at 301: ‘one cannot
escape the conclusion that if profits have any influence as a motivating force, any surplus which
can be made over a satisfactory return to the investor would be better employed when held out
as an incentive to action by control [management] than when handed over to the “owners”
who have surrendered control.’ Remuneration schemes linking rewards to corporate performance
capitalize on this incentive effect: see 114-16 and 221-6 below.

44 See L L Dallas, “Iwo Models of Corporate Governance: Beyond Berle and Means’, (1988)
22 U Mich 7 L Ref 1g, at 53-68. An alternative approach, associated principally with
Williamson, points to the asset-specific character of the shareholders’ investment, such that
investment is likely to be forthcoming only on terms that the firm will maximize profits for the
benefit of shareholders: Williamson, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism (above, n. 8), at 52-61,
explained and criticized in Dallas (above), at 69-80. The shareholders’ role as risk bearers is
also frequently cited as justifying their position, see e.g. E. F. Fama and M. C. Jensen,
‘Separation of Ownership and Control’, (1983) 26 7 LZ and Econ 301, at 302-3: because the
shareholders’ entitlements arise only when all contractual claimants have been satisfied, they
require a higher return when the company is successful. It is not, however, self-evident that their
reward needs to be the whole of the residual: see Goyder, The Responsible Company (above, n. 66),
ch. 16. And see Dahl, A Preface to Economic Democracy (above, n. 32), at 79-80, dismissing the
argument that investors are morally entitled to a reward for sacrificing the use of their money.

45 A'chian and Demsetz, ‘Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization’
(above, n. 30) .

9Z0Z YOJeW 90 UO Jesn Areign ON Aq 9O097ESZPL/Je}deUD/2 /EzOOg/WOD dno‘s}Wepede//:sdyY WO papeojuMoq
Corporate Power 47

behaviour of team members over monitoring of teams by market competi-
tion.)'** The central monitor, in turn, is given an incentive not to shirk in
performing the monitoring function by giving him or her a right to the
residual, that is, a right to the surplus that remains after all the other factors
of production have been paid at the market rate. Since the size of the
residual depends on the efficiency of the firm, the monitor has an interest in
ensuring that the firm is run as efficiently as possible. In the classical firm the
central monitor is the owner/entrepreneur. In the large company with
professional management the monitoring role is performed by the occupants
of various levels in the management hierarchy, culminating with the board,
but with the board itself ultimately monitored by the shareholders. Share-
holder monitoring may be depicted as taking an owner-like, internal form,
involving scrutiny of management and replacement of under-performing
directors via the company’s democratic channels, or an external form,
whereby dissatisfied shareholders dispose of shares in the market, possibly
triggering the removal of the board via the market for corporate control.!*’
In either event, it is argued that the residual rights of the shareholders create
an appropriate incentive for them to activate the relevant disciplinary
mechanisms. As well as the shareholders having the proper incentives to
prevent shirking, it should be added that they also have incentives to press
management to make decisions that will maximize profits. Since the
shareholders, standing last in line but with an unlimited right to the surplus,
gain most from top quality performance, they have a powerful reason to hold
managers to the profit-maximization objective.'*

As Chapter 3 will discuss, the legal duties imposed on management are
directed towards shareholder benefit. ‘They do not consist of an abstract duty
to maximize profits or otherwise to act in the interests of society. Similarly,
ultimate rights of control over the company are legally vested in the sharehold-
ers, giving them, at least in theory, the ability to shape the company’s
purposes for their own ends. The members’ status as residual claimants
suggests that they have in fact the same interest in profit maximization as we
have postulated for society as a whole, and the incentive to enforce profit

'© Ibid. 779-80.

‘7 See 119-31 below. The active role of the shareholders in the market for control partly
undermines Berle and Means’ claim in The Modern Corporation and Private Property (above, n. 76),
at 312, that ‘by surrendering control and responsibility over the active property [i.e. the
company’s assets], [the shareholders] have surrendered the right that the corporation should be
operated in their sole interest, -— they have released the community from the obligation to
protect them to the full extent implied in the doctrine of strict property rights’. From the social
enterprise perspective, however, in order to show that the company need not be operated in the
shareholders’ interests exclusively it is not necessary to establish a ‘surrender’ by the shareholders
of their rights or a functional attentuation of their role, but rather that a policy of profit
maximization fails to serve the public interest: see further 265-6 below.

‘#8 See Easterbrook and Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law (above, n. gg), at
67-8.

9Z0Z YON 90 UO Jesn Ayesgiq ON Aq 909PSSZPL/Me]deUD/2/7/400qG/WoOd dno‘oWwapede//:sdyjy WoO papeojuMog
48 Corporate Power

maximization in both their own and the social interest. This therefore
suggests a unity between the fundamentals of the existing structure of
company law and the interests of society, as they have been provisionally
defined. Chapter 12 will examine the challenge to the notion that the
shareholders are uniquely qualified to be holders of residual rights, and the
argument that a form of productive organization in which the trading
surplus accrues to the employees rather than the providers of capital is
capable of operating no less efficiently, at least as far as the control of
shirking is concerned,'*® than the existing corporate form. In the meantime
the discussion will largely remain within the shareholder-centred conception
of business enterprise, and during the course of the next seven chapters it will
be considered whether in practice the mechanisms of shareholder control,
particularly against a background of widely dispersed holdings, are adequate
to promote satisfactory levels of corporate efficiency.

The Justificatory Force of the Maximization of Social Wealth

In the foregoing discussion the interest of society in the efficient creation of
wealth was recognized. If it is assumed that the system of corporate enterprise
is the most efficient system for the creation of wealth,’ should it therefore be
concluded that corporate power is legitimate? In other words, does the
system’s putatively superior wealth generating capacity justify the
concentration of decision-making power that is entailed? Putting the question
this way makes clear that a Justification in terms of wealth relies on a trade-
off: corporate decision-making power should be accepted as the price of
efficient wealth creation. The point is not that companies are ideal
mechanisms for making decisions which have important social effects (in the
sense that we would choose them for this purpose, other considerations being
equal). Rather, it is that if we want the benefits of efficient wealth creation it
must be acknowledged that companies will inevitably possess power.

In order to be persuaded by this justification one would need to be
satisfied that the price is worth paying, that is, that alternative arrangements
in which power was more widely diffused would not be preferable, even
though this might mean that the system produced less wealth overall. This is
clearly a matter for moral or political evaluation and can have no objective
answer. It is, however, important to be a little clearer about the moral

49 Apart from the question of shirking it is argued that enterprises under worker control will
adopt a goal of maximizing the income of current workers rather than of profit maximization,
and will accordingly adopt sub-optimal employment and investment policies: see 428-33,
below.

5° A systematic assessment of whether this assumption is valid is beyond the scope of this
book (and the capacity of the author). Some consideration will, however, be given to the
relative efficiency of worker-controlled enterprises in Ch. 12.

9Z0Z Ye 90 UO Jesn AJeIQI] ON Aq 909PSSZrL/JeIdeYd// /E7/4OOq/W0d'dno‘siwepedce//:sdyjy Wo pepeo|uMog
Corporate Power 49

significance of wealth maximization. That the aggregate wealth of society is
as high as it can be is of no moral value in itself; what counts is the effect of
increases in total wealth on the welfare of the individuals who make up
society.’°! The maximization of social wealth is not however the same thing
as the maximization of total or average welfare. An economy may be highly
efficient, in the sense that goods and services are produced with the minimum
of waste and are allocated in accordance with the demand for them, while at
the same time the basic needs of many go unsatisfied. What is in issue here 1s
‘demand’ that includes an ability to pay, and that is a function of the
distribution of wealth. As Veljanovski points out, ‘if wealth is concentrated
in the hands of a few rich landowners who buy Rolls Royces and caviar,
then allocative efficiency will be consistent with the poor starving and the
economy’s productive capacity channelled into the manufacture of these
luxury items. If wealth were distributed more equitably, less Rolls Royces
and caviar and more necessities of life would be produced’.'*? The plausibility
of a justification of power in terms of wealth cannot therefore be separated
from questions about how wealth is distributed. ‘The issue of the legitimacy
of corporate enterprise can, however, be saved from being swallowed up in
this wider debate if the assumption is made that alternative patterns of
distribution can be secured through state action should the prevailing one be
considered morally unappealing. In other words the justification for corporate
enterprise lies in its ability to create wealth against any given background
distribution. If the existing distribution is unsatisfactory that is not an
objection to corporate enterprise but results from the failure to rectify
distributive injustice. Of course, against this position, it is possible that
corporate power is itself a barrier to changes in distribution.'*? Furthermore,
corporate capitalism is actually a generator of substantial inequalities in
primary incomes, and it is arguable that such inequalities are a precondition
for the effective functioning of the system, with the consequence that the
scope for redistribution is in practice limited.'**

A different way of questioning the justification of corporate power in terms

'5! For a discussion of these issues, see R. Dworkin, ‘Is Wealth a Value?’, (1980) 9 7 of Legal
Studies 191, reprinted in R. Dworkin, A Matter of Principle (1985) 237. And see the reply by R. A.
Posner, The Economics of Justice (1981) 107-15, reprinted as ‘Dworkin’s Critique of Wealth
Maximization’, in M. Cohen (ed.), Ronald Dworkin and Contemporary Jurisprudence (1984), 238,
and Dworkin’s response, ibid. 295. See also R. A. Posner, ‘Utilitarianism, Economics, and Legal
Theory’, (1979) 8 7 of Legal Studies 103, at 119-136; J. L. Coleman, Markets, Morals and the Law
(1988), at 112. And see J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1972), e.g. at 71: ‘the principle of efficiency
cannot serve alone as a conception of justice’.

82 C. G. Veljanovski, “The New Law-and-Economics: A Research Review’, in A. I. Ogus
and C. G. Veljanovski (eds), Readings in the Economics of Law and Regulation (1984), 12, at 22.

193 See 19-21, above.

5 See R. A. Dahl, A Preface to Economic Democracy (above, n. 32), at 102-3; Miller, Market,
State and Community (above, n. 57), at 14-15.

9Z0Z YOJe 90 UO Jesn Ayeiqr ON Aq 909PSSZrL/JeIdeYD// /6z/4OOq/WON'dno‘slWwapese//:sdyy Wo pepeojumog
50 Corporate Power

of wealth maximisation’ is to argue that at least beyond a certain level of
prosperity, increases in wealth do not compensate for, cannot be traded-off
against, the accumulation of power. The corollary of the possession of power
by companies is that the individuals, interest groups, and communities
affected by it suffer a lack of control over the conditions which determine
how they live their lives. The power to make decisions that is located within
companies could in principle be vested in, or at least shared with, the
affected groups. An alternative vision of human flourishing to that which
underlies wealth maximization as a social goal ranks autonomy above
continued increases in material well-being, and thus calls into question the
legitimacy of non-participative organizations. Some of the measures discussed
in Chapter 11, designed to induce socially responsible behaviour on the part
of companies, involve the empowerment of affected groups vis-a-vis the
company, and consequently a reduction of corporate power over them.
Chapter 12 will consider more comprehensive arrangements for participation
in decision making by the group whose interests are most intimately bound
up with the company, the employees. More radical demands for participation
argue against the legitimacy of the capitalist corporate form altogether. A
suggested alternative, the worker-controlled enterprise, will be discussed
towards the end of the chapter, and in particular whether worker-controlled
firms can be designed in such a way that participation is not bought at the
price of rendering the economy as a whole substantially less efficient.

55 There are of course other ways, e.g. the Marxist objection to the exploitation of labour by
capital.

9Z0Z Yue QO UO Jesn Ayeiqr7 ON Aq gO09PESZPL/JOIdeYUD/2 /Ez/4OOqG/WON dno‘slWwepese//:sdyY Wo. pepeojumog
