2.1 Introduction

The basic framework of the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) outlined in the previ-
ous chapter involves the following five regimes: (i) proprietary copyright;
(ii) liability relating to technological protection measures and rights manage-
ment information; (iii) performers’ rights; (iv) moral rights and (v) criminal
liability. The first of these - proprietary copyright - is the bedrock regime. In
the Anglosphere, the proprietary rights in the literary expression of an author
are the historical kernel of copyright; the 1709 Statute of Anne.* From 1709 both
the scope of copyright subject matter and the breadth of the activities that fall
within exclusive proprietary rights have expanded. Thus the Statute of Anne
(to use modern language) recognised one subject matter, the literary work, and
two exclusive rights: the reproduction of the work and the sale of copies with
knowledge they were infringing copies. Modern Australian law recognises as
proprietary copyright subject matter four different types of work - literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic - and four different types of subject matter other
than a work - sound recordings, cinematograph films, broadcasts (both televi-
sion and sound) and published editions. Attached to these are a number and
range of exclusive rights that extend well beyond the basic two rights conferred
in the Statute of Anne. For example, since 2001 these rights include the right to

communicate the subject matter to the public by making it available online or
electronically transmitting it.

Within proprietary copyright there exists a fundamental divide between
subject matter and the exclusive rights that are bundled with the subject matter
and capable of licensed exploitation and infringement. The subject matter
comprises the copyright nouns. The exclusive rights are the copyright verbs.
As is explained in Chapter 5, through a mix of legislation and judicial gloss
thereon, “substantial part” has emerged as the central legal concept that joins
subject matter to exclusive rights: doing an act in relation to copyright subject
matter requires as a minimum that the act is done in relation to a substantial
part of the subject matter.

Therefore, proprietary copyright involves most fundamentally subject
matter and exclusive rights, joined together by the substantial part concept.
Subject matter consists of the work and subject matter other than a work. This
chapter is concerned with the meaning of what is a work within the proprietary
copyright regime of the 1968 Act.

Before outlining the contours of the four categories of work (literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic) the two (or three) threshold requirements that
must be met for all works are explained. These are: originality, material form
and (most probably) substantiality.

communicate the subject matter to the public by making it available online or
electronically transmitting it.

Within proprietary copyright there exists a fundamental divide between
subject matter and the exclusive rights that are bundled with the subject matter
and capable of licensed exploitation and infringement. The subject matter
comprises the copyright nouns. The exclusive rights are the copyright verbs.
As is explained in Chapter 5, through a mix of legislation and judicial gloss
thereon, “substantial part” has emerged as the central legal concept that joins
subject matter to exclusive rights: doing an act in relation to copyright subject
matter requires as a minimum that the act is done in relation to a substantial
part of the subject matter.

Therefore, proprietary copyright involves most fundamentally subject
matter and exclusive rights, joined together by the substantial part concept.
Subject matter consists of the work and subject matter other than a work. This
chapter is concerned with the meaning of what is a work within the proprietary
copyright regime of the 1968 Act.

Before outlining the contours of the four categories of work (literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic) the two (or three) threshold requirements that
must be met for all works are explained. These are: originality, material form
and (most probably) substantiality.

2.2 Originality

Under s 32 of the 1968 Act, copyright only subsists (i.e. legally exists) in
“an original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work” (emphasis added)
whether unpublished or published. When the Copyright Act 1911 (UK) first
introduced the statutory subsistence requirement that works be “original” it
was questioned in the British Parliament. The Solicitor-General answered that
questioning in the following way:
Before a man can claim protection of the law of copyright that which he
claims to protect as his should really be his in the sense that his is the brain
that has first of all applied itself to the subject matter and produced the
composition, or, at any rate, that his is the brain which, though it has not
produced the composition, has expressed it in a new form?
While the distinction drawn by the Solicitor-General between producing a
composition and the new expression of a composition is a fine one, in all cases
a human author is required for a work to subsist. In copyright law the term
“original” is short-hand for “that which originates from the mind of a human
author”. This concept is in use when describing “original expression”, an
“original work” or when assessing for substantial part purposes the “ original-
ity” taken. Isaacs J in Sands and McDougal v Robinson offered the following
explanation:

[In copyright law the two expressions ‘author’ and ‘original work’ have
always been correlative; the one connotes the other, and there is no indica-
tion in the Act that the Legislature intended to depart from the accepted
signification of the words as applied to the subject matter. Indeed, the
circumstance of reciprocal connotation is the key to the meaning of the
enactment. We find in the Oxford Dictionary ... ‘author’ defined as ‘the
person who originates or gives existence to anything’?

The term “author” is defined in the 1968 Act only in relation to one class of
artistic work, a photograph, for which it means “the person who took the
photograph’ Basic matters about authorship and originality are by and large
left to common law evolution and development. Originality gives rise to a
number of fundamental points.

First, is that the relevant author of a work is the natural person whose intel-
lect was responsible for the expression of the work. This does not convey that
expression must have any merit-based quality of inventiveness, as is required
in patent law, or any other form of freshness. It has been long ago accepted
from an English case involving the composition of university mathematics
problems for examination purposes that originality did not require much by
way of merit, merely human origination of expression.? However, the essence
of originality being in human expression underscores the key limitation upon
the scope of copyright works protection: it only protects substantial part
takings of that authorial expression.

This leads on to the second issue: the breadth and flexibility of originality
as a copyright concept. Each of the “selfie” taken ina moment by you on your
smart device and J K Rowling's Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone is an
original work. You are the author of an original artistic work; J K Rowling is
the author of an original literary work. However, the complexity and depth
of the two originalities are of a vastly different nature. Your originality is in
one instance essentially documenting factual matter. Rowling's originality is
the far more involved undertaking of confecting an imaginary world. Both
originalities will equally sustain each as an original work for (under the current
Australian law) the life of each author and then 70 years. Although when
consideration is given as to what will be needed to be taken from each work
for it to be a substantial part, the thinness of your originality and a thickness
of Rowling's will have a bearing. In short, an exact or near exact taking of
the whole of your selfie may well be required for it to comprise a substantial
part of your originality, whereas merely taking a scene, certain plot elements
or a character from Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone might be argued
successfully to comprise a substantial part of Rowling's originality.

The third, is that originality is tied to the particular expression of the work,
rather than in background work, or the generating of ideas or the finding
out of facts. Photographer A discovers an obscure, yet public, location that
gives her access to a spectacular natural scene at dusk in summertime and
she photographs that scene. The photograph, as explained in this chapter, is
an original artistic work. However, the originality is in the artistry and skill of
the undertaking the photograph in its particular form of expression. None of
the effort in finding the location, or the idea of photographing the scene from
that location at that time, or indeed the fact of the existence of that location
or scene can be regarded as obvious aspects of photographer A’s original
authorial expression. Copyright law precludes no other photographer from
visiting the same location at dusk in summertime and using the same scene as
their subject. Hence the maxim: copyright protects expression rather than idea.
Originality relevant to copyright in works is the expressive form of the work,
and in neither the underlying idea for a work of that type nor any underlying
factual matter the subject of the expression. Photographer B, however, confects
the following still life scene that he photographs: three large rusty nails speared
into a granny smith apple, positioned against a background covered in royal
blue velvet and the scene artificially lit in a yellow tone. Here copyright law
regards photographer B’s originality as having a different qualitative nature to
that of photographer A. It is possible to characterise another photographer who
upon seeing B’s photograph recreates a very similar scene and photographs it,
to be reproducing a substantial part of photographer B’s originality.

Fourth (and related to the treatment of photographer A above) while the
finding out of factual matter is not relevant original expression per se, putting a
compilation of facts into a particular form - whether it be a database, a timeta-
ble, anon-fiction book, a map or some other useful fact-based expression - will
amount to originality. However, it seems that such form-based expression is
regarded in Australian law as quite thin originality. It gives to the author no
stake in the underlying facts. Rather, only when a substantial part of the form
of their organisation and presentment is taken (e.g. by quite exact mechanical
appropriation) is it likely that exclusive rights will be exercised.”

Fifth, identifying that person or those people who contributed the relevant
originality has emerged as a critical task in copyright infringement litigation ®
As will be explained in Chapter 4 (see: 4.2.1) in the absence of some ownership
exception, the first copyright owner of a work is the person or people whose
ity is responsible for the expression of the work. Related to this, the
level of computer intervention in shaping that which is said to be a work has
become a significant topic. In Data Access v Powerflex originality was found to
subsist in a so-called Huffman compression table that had been produced by a

director of the plaintiff by writing a program which used the known Huffman
algorithm and applying the program to a data file of the plaintiff.° The table
worked within the plaintiff's retail product, its Dataflex program. The defend-
ant submitted that this table within the Dataflex program was itself produced
by the operation of a computer program and as such lacked originality. The
High Court, upholding the conclusion of the trial judge and Full Federal Court,
found sufficient originality:

The skill and judgment employed by [the plaintiff] was perhaps more
directed to writing the program setting out the Huffman algorithm and
applying this program to a representative sample of data than to composing
the bit strings in the Huffman table. Nevertheless, the standard Dataflex
Huffman table emanates from [the plaintiff] as a result of substantial skill
and judgment. That being so, the Full Court was correct in holding that the
standard Dataflex Huffman table constituted an original literary work.”

In recent years two Full Federal Court decisions have held that matter put
forward as a literary work was computer-generated, non-authorial and there-
fore lacking in originality. In Telstra Corporation v Phone Directories Company
compilations (clearly within the literary work category) produced as directo-
ries of telephone numbers were essentially computer-generated and as such
lacked requisite originality to qualify as works." In Acohs v Ucorp the plaintiff's
programmers had written a computer program (Infosafe) as part of a system
such that when data was subsequently entered by third parties into the system,
the program produced the source code in HyperText Markup Language
(‘HTML’) script for the generation of material safety data sheets. The issue
was whether the source code (clearly within the literary work category) was
original. Applying its earlier decision in Telstra Corporation v Phone Directories
Company the Full Court was in no doubt that it was not:

This example simply confirmed the discrete nature of the source code as a
separate work created by the operation of the Infosafe program on other
elements entered into the Infosafe system. It did not emanate from authors.
It was not an original work in the copyright sense.”
This approach has far-reaching consequences. To give one example. Imagine
the selfie mentioned earlier is taken by you issuing the voice command: “Hi,
Bixby, take a selfie” - where “Bixby” is the electronic personal assistant associ-
ated with your Samsung device. If this command causes the camera on the
device to be activated, to focus on your face and to take the selfie, would this
also be considered essentially computer-generated and therefore lacking your
originality to sustain the resulting image as an artistic work? There appears
no hard and fast rule, particularly in view of the High Court decision in Data
Access v Powerflex. It seems that the particular circumstances surrounding the
computer-assisted generation of a work need to always be assessed: whether

the work has been created by a human author or by human authors is a matter
of fact and degree.* A recommendation made by the Copyright Law Review
Committee in 1994 was that when “material is generated by computer in
circumstances such that there is no human author of the material” it should
be afforded protection for a term of 25 years as Part IV (non-authorial) subject
matter.** This recommendation has not been taken up by the legislature.
Finally, the original expression protected in copyright is classically a matter
of aesthetics. While the modern reach of copyright in protecting the value of
the originality in things such as industrious compilations, technical drawings
and computer programs precludes being too absolutist about copyright being
aesthetics-exclusive, that aesthetics is at the heart of the copyright interest
remains its most important confining attribute. So that Baker v Selden would
be decided today in Australia as it had been decided in the US in the 19th
century.” In that case the US Supreme Court distinguished between the plain-
tiff’s expression of his published book-keeping forms and the functional use of
the underlying book-keeping methods that they conformed to. The plaintiff's
originality was in the expressed forms and this limited his copyright claim
to the reproduction of those forms. The nature of that limit meant copyright
protection could not extend to his underlying book-keeping methods.

2.3 Material form

The Berne Convention, while precluding formalities, by art 2(2) permits Berne
members to prescribe that works may be denied protection “unless they have
been fixed in some material form”. Australia has long enacted a material form
requirement for works. Section 22(1) of the 1968 Act imposes a requirement
that the subsistence (legal existence) of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
work commences when “the work was first reduced to writing or some other
material form”. In turn, material form is defined in s 10(1) to include any form,
whether visible or not, of storage of the work, whether or not the work can be
reproduced therefrom. Section 22(2) makes clear, for the avoidance of doubt,
that literary, dramatic or musical work which “exists in the form of sounds
embodied in an article or thing shall be deemed to have been reduced to a
material form ... at the time when those sounds were embodied in that article
or thing”.

On this definitional framework, the one matter that should be explained
at the outset is the quixotic reference to whether or not the form of storage is

“visible”. While the s 22(1) requirement of reduction to writing or some other
“material form” was in the 1968 Act from its commencement, a definition of
material form was not introduced into the Act until 1984. This was in the context
of reforms to the Act to make clear that the “literary work” category includes a
computer program in any language or code. The Explanatory Memorandum
explained the addition of the material form definition as follows:

The definition of material form is new and makes it clear that material form
includes such methods of fixation as storage or reproduction on magnetic
tape, read only or random access computer memory, magnetic or laser
disks, bubble memories and other forms of storage which will doubtless
be developed.**

Thus, “whether visible or not” refers not to the visibility of the form of stor-
age as a chattel (such as a USB flash drive) but instead means “whether in a
human-readable form or not”. The language about reproducibility from the
form of storage - a material form is satisfied whether or not the work can be
reproduced from that form - will be explained in the contexts of exclusive
rights and circumvention liability.”

The Australian material form requirement operates as a limitation upon the
role that proprietary copyright has in protecting such things as extemporary
speech and improvised music that have not been put in any fixed form.® It is
intended as a mechanism to place metes and bounds around the proprietary
copyright regime. Ina famous attack upon common law copyright, Pollock CB
launched a broadside in the following terms:

The speech of the orator, the sermon of the preacher, the lecture of the profes-
sor, have no greater claim to protection, and to be the foundation of exclusive
property and right, than the labours of the man of science, the invention
of the mechanic, the discovery of the physician or empiric, or indeed the
successful efforts of any one in any department of human knowledge or
practice. And it is difficult to say where, in principle, this is to stop; why is it
to be confined to, the larger and graver labours of the understanding? Why
does it not apply to a well-told anecdote, or a witty reply, so as to forbid the
repetition without the permission of the author? And, carried to its utmost
extent, it would at length descend to lower and meaner subjects, and include
the trick of a conjuror, or the grimace of a clown.”

By insisting upon materiality, proprietary copyright is insisting upon an arte-
fact upon which the nature of authorial originality can be assessed and the

extent to which that originality has been appropriated by an alleged infringer
can be forensically measured.

However, it is a mistake to confuse the work with its first reduction to a
material form. Proprietary copyright is intellectual property. It is intangible
property, a chose in action. While s 22(1) requires that works start their term
of subsistence from their first reduction to writing or other material form, that
fixation is not the work per se. To take a specific example: Graham Sutherland's
famous 1954 portrait of Winston Churchill was incinerated by its subject
shortly after the work was completed. While the painted portrait was the first
reduction to a material form of the artistic work, the work itself is the intangible
property of Sutherland’s expressive artistic form. Sutherland died in 1980 so
that under current Australian law the copyright term in the artistic work will
expire in 2050; 70 years after his death.” That is, the subsistence of copyright
in Sutherland's artistic work as intellectual property is unaffected by the fact
that the chattel property consisting of the portrait Sutherland had painted was
incinerated by Churchill in 1955 or 1956.

Finally, material form is a concept that is re-used for the cardinal exclusive
right bundled with all works: “to reproduce the work in a material form’. It
is in this context that most disputes have arisen, and the topic of what is a
material form for the Act’s purposes will be returned to in Chapter 6 (see: 6.2.4)
and Chapter 7 (see: 7.6.3).

24 Substantiality

The third threshold requirement for works is non-statutory, and the most
contestable. To what extent must the thing posited as a work be substantial
in either (i) the complexity of its expression or (ii) the quantum of originality
that has been expended? Would a circle drawn ona page constitute an original
artistic work? Lawton J's dim view of the artistic work copyright claim made in
relation to UK pop star Adam Ant's face paint captures a judicial philosophy:
“Two straight lines drawn with grease-paint with another line in between them
drawn with some other colouring matter, in my judgment by itself could not
possibly attract copyright”.2 This was an objection seemingly more on the
first criteria - the insubstantiality of the expressed form. Contrast the similar
outcome based more on the second criteria - quantum of originality - arrived
at by Tamberlin J. This was in relation to a trade logo that was drawn in about
four minutes: “The evidence indicates that the logo did not embody any signifi-
cant work or skill in its generation ... I am not satisfied that the [logo] was a
sufficiently substantial work to attract copyright. It was a ‘trivial’ work” 2
Emmett J when rejecting the line of text HELP-HELP-DRIVER-IN-DANGER-
CALL-POLICE-PH.000 to be an original literary work, observed:

Whilst the required skill or labour necessary for the creation of a literary
work in which copyright may subsist is not large, it must not be insubstan-
tial. For example, as a rule, a title does not involve literary composition
and is not sufficiently substantial to justify claims of copyright protection.*

A similar approach was taken by Bennett J when considering whether news-
paper headlines such as “Investors warned on super changes” were in and
of themselves original literary works.” She found both doctrinal and policy
objections to such recognition. As a doctrinal matter, headline writing did not
qualitatively or quantitatively justify description as a “work” in most cases:
“Headlines generally are, like titles, simply too insubstantial and too short
to qualify for copyright protection as literary works”. As a policy matter,
conferral of copyright work status would create too much inconvenience by
impairing the legitimate interest of third parties to identify the article to which
the heading relates: “[t]he need to identify a work by its name is a reason for
the exclusion of titles from copyright protection in the public interest”.”

Until the High Court or legislature makes matters clearer, it seems that
the mainstream position is that there does exist a threshold requirement of
substantiality that applies to originality expended, complexity of expression or
both. This is an outcome that can be readily supported in a copyright system
in which formalities (such as copyright registration) are precluded. Filtering
trivial matter from the realms of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work
recognition conforms to the maxim de minimis non curat lex which has been
long deployed to prevent legal regimes from embarrassment.

Assuming that originality, materiality and substantiality are all satisfied,
the proprietary copyright regime is a metaphorical filing cabinet in that unless
there is a category into which some putative work can be slotted, it will not
be legally recognised as a work. For works there are four categories - literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic - with only the latter being framed by a closed
(i.e. exhaustive) definition.

2.5 Literary works

A literary work is defined to include “a table, or compilation, expressed
in words figures or symbols” and “a computer program or compilation of
computer programs”. In short this makes clear for the avoidance of doubt
that the category extends to these things, with compilations and computer
programs each comprising sub-topics that require some special attention.
However, the great bulk of the literary work category is left undefined.

2.51 Generally

As a general matter copyright law has no snobbish view about what might
amount to a literary work. Anything readable, from a 50-word tweet to a
500,000-word manuscript, can be considered a literary work. The clarity and
breadth of this rule probably explains why there is remarkably little litigation
on point.

The following statement by Petersen J from University of London Press,
when considering whether mathematics examination papers were literary
works, has remained good law for over a century:

It may be difficult to define ‘literary work’ as used in this Act, but it seems
to be plain that it is not confined to ‘literary work’ in the sense in which
that phrase is applied, for instance, to Meredith’s novels and the writings
of Robert Louis Stevenson. In speaking of such writings as literary works,
one thinks of the quality, the style, and the literary finish which they exhibit.
Under the Act of 1842, which protected ‘books’, many things which had
no pretensions to literary style acquired copyright; for example, a list of
registered bills of sale, a list of foxhounds and hunting days, and trade
catalogues; and I see no ground for coming to the conclusion that the
present Act was intended to curtail the rights of authors. In my view the
words ‘literary work’ cover work which is expressed in print or writing,
irrespective of the question whether the quality or style is high. The word
‘literary’ seems to be used in a sense somewhat similar to the use of the word
‘literature’ in political or electioneering literature and refers to written or
printed matter. Papers set by examiners are, in my opinion, ‘literary work’
within the meaning of the present Act”

Shortly after this holding, the New South Wales Supreme Court found to be
a literary work a set of clauses comprising a standard form contract for use in
real estate conveyancing. While accepting that the standard form was sold by
the plaintiff to be put to practical use in land conveyancing, that purpose did
not deprive it of its character as a literary work.*

Literary works give rise to - as the US case of Baker v Selden referred to
above illustrates* - the critical limitation about the confinement of the nature
of any work to expression. In Baker v Selden the literary work consisting of the
book-keeping forms did not include within it the underlying book-keeping
method.* Likewise, a written set of instructions for the use of a machine or
performing a task or the rules for playing a game can each be protected in their
expressed formas literary works. However, those works do not encompass the
respective use, task or game. As a policy matter the more such literary works
encroach upon utilitarian activities, the more likely it is that the Australian
judicial tendency will require that for any taking to be a substantial part it must
be of such a quantity and quality to take a significant amount of the actual

expression of the work.* Functionality, if it is to be protected in intellectual
property, should be the subject of a valid patent claim or shielded through the
more fragile (but potentially longer lasting) breach of confidence obligation
by maintaining sheer secrecy - such as a secret recipe or method. Copyright
law is a poor vehicle for such protection. This helps explain the basis upon
which the Australian High Court has in this century dealt with the integra-
tion of certain compilations and computer programs within the literary work
category - topics discussed next.

2.5.2 Tables and compilations

Since 1948 the Berne Convention has required that:
Collections of literary or artistic works such as encyclopedias and antholo-
gies which, by reason of the selection and arrangement of their contents,

constitute intellectual creations, shall be protected as such, without preju-
dice to the copyright in each of the works forming part of such collections.

The indication that this subject matter is directed to “encyclopaedias and
anthologies” suggests very much a confinement of the Berne minimum for
compilation copyright to collections of prior literary or artistic works, when
their collection require “execution, discernment, taste, learning and intelligent
labour” * Since 1995 the TRIPS agreement, under the heading “copyright and
related rights”, provides in art 10(2):
Compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or
other form, which by reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents
constitute intellectual creations shall be protected as such. Such protection,
which shall not extend to the data or material itself, shall be without preju-
dice to any copyright subsisting in the data or material itself.>°

The salient distinction between the Berne and TRIPS standards is the former's
limitation to collections of literary or artistic works, whereas the latter admits
wider collections of “data or other material”. Importantly, both speak of
the effective originality justifying the protection as residing in “selection or
arrangement”.

2.5.2.1 Walter v Lane originality

When Australia reformed its law in order to join the WTO the reformulated
TRIPS obligation relating to compilations did not necessitate any statutory



reform, largely due to the prior 1984 reforms.” The 1911 UK Act defined a liter-
ary work to include “maps, charts, plans, tables, and compilations”. The 1968
Act consigned “diagram, map, chart or plan” within the realm of the artistic
work, and as first-enacted, included “written table or compilation” within the
definition of a literary work in s 10(1), where “writing” and “written” were
also (and remain) separately defined in terms requiring a “visible form’ °° The
1984 reforms took a belts and braces approach to ensure that electronic data-
bases (i.e. modern tables and compilations of obvious economic value) were
protected as literary works by removing the “written” requirement and adding
a “whether or not in a visible form” rider similar to that also inserted then to
the material form definition.* In 2000, consistent with the recommendation of
the CLRC Computer Software Report of 1995, that rider was deleted from the
reference to “table or compilation” as superfluous - the material form reforms
of 1984 meant that copyright subsisted in works stored “invisibly” “° Thus, the
current inclusionary language of the literary work definition in s 10(1) is today:
“a table, or compilation, expressed in words, figures or symbols”.

Aside from statutory language, because of the influence of the 1900 House
of Lords decision in I Valter v Lane, until 2009 Australian copyright law had
long provided compilation protection quite beyond both the Berne and TRIPS
minimum standards. However as will be explained, in the wake of the 2009
High Court decision in IceTV v Nine Network the status of Valter v Lane in
modern Australian copyright law is contestable.

The issue in Valter » Lane was whether originality resided in newspaper
reporters’ transcriptions of the public speeches made by a public figure at
public venues which the reporters attended. Prior to the 1911 British Act, the
public figure’s oral public delivery prior to securing statutory copyright by
relevant print publication meant that he had divested the capacity to obtain
print copying rights by future print publication and he also lost the common
law copyright then recognised in unpublished writings." As for the reporters
transcripts and their newspaper employer, the issue was not strictly speaking
one of “originality” - a root of title concept that was to emerge from 1911.
Rather it was whether the reporters were authors of those transcripts under
the then 1842 Copyright Law Amendment Act (UK) regime. If so, the newspaper's
print publication had secured the statutory rights in them as literary works,
and the newspaper could succeed against a third-party book publisher who
had republished the printed speeches in book form. By a 4 to 1 majority the
House of Lords found that the reporters were the authors of the transcripts. In

the majority Lords Halsbury, Davey and Brampton all stretched the concept
of authorship in order for statutory copyright to afford protection against
free- riding. Lord Halsbury candidly acknowledging that: “I should very much
regret it if I were compelled to come to the conclusion that the state of the law
permitted one man to make profit and to appropriate to himself the labour,
skill, and capital of another” .“? The investment by the newspaper in gathering
and publishing a useful factual information warranted protection.

As is the way of the common law, the holding in Valter v Lane had an
influence to colour the meaning of originality when the statutory criterion
was introduced into the 1911 Act. Protection extended to the sheer industry
involved in making exhaustive factual compilations; originality was said
to be in that industry alone. As such, if a third party could appropriate that
industry in some other form, the lack of visual or formal resemblance did
not preclude a finding of a substantial part taking. This is controversial, in
that copyright law has been said to be overreaching and conferring de facto
protection against unfair competition. Thus in a case such as Skybase v Fortuity,
the plaintiff asserted protection in its “Weight Watchers” diet program that
it claimed had been reproduced by a former employee through her “Trim
for Life” rival program. In upholding the trial judge’s findings of an original
literary work in the plaintiff's program and substantial part reproduction of it
by the defendant, the Full Federal Court relied on the principle:

[T]hat if one person has, with considerable labour, compiled a work from
various sources which he has digested and arranged, then a defendant
who instead of taking the pains of researching the common sources and
obtaining this subject matter from them, simply makes use of the other's
labour and adopts his arrangement, perhaps with only slight variations,
thus saving himself the pains and labour which the other used, this will be
an illegitimate use.“*

Desktop Marketing Systems v Telstra Corporation in 2002 provides an even
clearer example of an industry-based justification for protection and reflected
the long-standing importance in Australian law of I Valter v Lane. The subject
matter was “whole of universe” directories of the names, addresses and
numbers of telephone subscribers. Sackville J’s opinion in the Full Federal
Court noted that the Spicer Committee's 1959 report (that formed the precursor
to the 1968 Act) had accepted that in cases involving compilations of data “the
question whether copyright exists depends to a large extent on the amount of
labour, capital or skill expended in making the compilation” and that “[w]e

think that the law in this regard should not be changed” * Consistent with
this Sackville J concluded - as did the trial judge and the other members of
the Full Court - that “originality in a factual compilation may lie in the labour
and expense involved in collecting the information recorded in the work, as
distinct from the ‘creative’ exercise of skill or judgment, or the application
of intellectual effort” .“* By accepting originality on this basis for both White
Pages (residential subscribers) and Yellow Pages (business subscribers) styles
of directory listings, all judges were willing to find that a substantial part
taking of such originality could occur without taking the form or presentation
of the copyright owner's compilation. All that was required was a substantial
appropriation - effectively free-riding or unfair competition - of the industry
expended by the compiler.

2.5.2.2 _IceTV v Nine Network and the retraction of Walter v Lane

Since the High Court's IceTV v Nine Network decision of 2009, in Australian
law there has been a retraction of this “industry protecting” role for copyright
in two related ways. The first has been to insist upon human authorship, and
to reject as non-original subject matter compilation expressions that have been
essentially produced by computers. The second has been to narrow down for
compilations what will be recognisable originality to selection or arrangement,
and to disallow sheer industry or investment as relevant originality. To put it
colloquially, whereas prior to 2009 compilations made by brawn or brain could
be literary works, from 2009 brain alone - and in particular a human authorial
brain - will be required.

However, the High Court’s 2009 decision in IceTV v Nine Network is not
an easy one. This is because in a six-member unanimous bench there are two
joint opinions, each comprising three justices, each supplying reasoning with
different emphasis and nuance. What can be referred to as the Gummow-led
opinion (being that of Gammow, Heydon and Hayne JJ) has its focus on the
nature of recognisable originality and its relationship to substantial part; the
French-led opinion (comprising French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ) places its
focus on what amounts to a substantial part when “factual” information is
being taken. The French-led opinion will be considered in Chapter 5 (see: 5.3.2);
understanding the significance of the Gummow-led opinion is important to
the current discussion.

The literary work in IceTV v Nine Network was a television broadcaster’ s
weekly schedule of programs, distributed in text and excel spreadsheet form
to third-party publishers for reproduction and communication under the
broadcaster's licence. In these file formats the weekly schedule was organised
by five columns. An illustrative page one from the broadcast week commenc-
ing Sunday 11 June 2006 was reproduced in the court's decision. These were:

column 1 provided the time each program was to be broadcast (e.g. starting
at 06.00); column 2 set out program and episode title (e.g. “MAKE WAY FOR
NODDY Policeman for a day” was the program listed for broadcast at 06.00);
column 3 listed information about the currency of the program - for example,
whether it was a repeat (e.g. the “Noddy” program was designated “Rpt”);
column 4 provided classification information (e.g. “G” for the “Noddy”
program), the format of the broadcast (e.g. “HD” for High Definition which
the “Noddy” program was not designated) and whether closed caption
information for the hearing impaired was to be transmitted (e.g. the “Noddy”
program was denoted a “S” for subtitles); and column 5 provided a summary
or synopsis of each program (e.g. for the “Noddy” program this was simply:
“ Animated series featuring the beloved Noddy”). The defendant, a third-party
provider of an electronic program guide, had made the admission at trial that
the weekly schedule was an original literary work. The only issue before the
High Court was whether the third-party provider had taken a substantial part
of the originality in the weekly schedule by use of the time information from
column 1 and the title information from column 2. The defendant's electronic
program guide rendered that time and title information in a somewhat simi-
lar column-based format, although it adopted its own graphics and layout,
supplied its own irreverent program descriptions.

While subsistence of copyright in the plaintiff's weekly schedule for want
of originality was not put in issue, important to understanding the methodol-
ogy of the Gummow-led opinion is its scepticism about the holding in Telstra
» Desktop Marketing:

It may be that the reasoning in Desktop Marketing with respect to compila-
tions is out of line with the understanding of copyright law over many
years. These reasons explain the need to treat with some caution the
emphasis in Desktop Marketing upon ‘labour and expense’ per se and upon
misappropriation.”
Earlier the opinion made the aside that: “The issue requiring the comparison
between what was taken and the whole of the work in suit may be distorted
by a meditation, inspired by Desktop Marketing, upon the protection given by
the Act against misappropriation of any investment of skill and labour by the
author.”
Given the defendant's concession that the weekly schedule was an original
work, what was that originality? On the Gummow-led opinion’s approach this

question necessarily required an answer to evaluate whether the defendant
had appropriated a substantial part of that originality in its use of the time and
title information. The Gummow-led opinion answered the threshold question
by identifying the literary work in issue was the five-columned weekly sched-
ule sent out to third-party publishers. Its originality resided in the unknown
individual who took the time and title choices made by programming execu-
tives and presented it with additional program information and synopses
to produce the five-columned composite.*’ The earlier program choices by
the executives were not considered relevant to its originality because it was
preparatory work that was not directed to the particular form of expression
of the five-column weekly schedule compilation. In terms of the TRIPS norm,
originality was more in the “arranged form” of the excel spreadsheet rather
than its “selected contents”. This led on to the finding by the Gummow-led
opinion that the defendant's use within its electronic program guide had
not taken a substantial part of that arranged form of the five-column weekly
schedule compilation.

Emerging from the Gummow-led opinion in IceTV v Nine Network is the
Australian copyright law proposition that mere industry or investment is
unlikely to readily qualify as originality to support literary work subsistence
in a compilation.” What is likely to be recognised as originality is the intel-
lectual work of evaluative selection or conceptual arrangement (or both) of
a human author when that work is proximate to the particular expression of
the compilation.

In light of IceTV v Nine Network the Full Federal Court had occasion to
apply this narrower conception of originality in Tonex v Dynamic." Dynamic’s
employee, a Mr Campbell, had curated from a larger database a nine-column.
compatibility chart serving as a ready-reckoner to identify which Dynamic-
supplied printer cartridge was compatible with which printer. The issue, after
IceTV v Nine Network, was whether the compatibility chart amounted to an
original work. The Full Federal Court, endorsing the trial judge’s reasoning,
found that Mr Campbell was indeed an author of a compilation literary work.
He had conferred sufficient originality. Three key points were put in support
of that conclusion:

(1) what had been selected to be included in the nine-column chart was
“informed by Mr Campbell's personal assessment of what information
might be valuable to a customer”;

(2) that selection was also informed by his appreciation that the greatest
utility to customers would be achieved by expressing the information
ina particular form for which there was a si icant element of discre-
tion so that the nature of the information did not dictate his choices as
to the data chosen or the form it was presented;

(3) the nine-column arrangement was devised by Mr Campbell to best
present information in a way considered helpful to customers who
would be using it as a searchable online resource.”

The approach taken in Tonnex International v Dynamic Supplies seems to
correctly follow the guidance provided by IceTV v Nine Network and conforms
Australian law to the TRIPS art 10(2) minimum standard. Critical to Dynamic’s
success in the litigation was the identification of who the human author was,
the nature of the authorial contributions in terms of selection and arrangement
of data, and being able to demonstrate how those contributions were matters of
discretion that controlled the particular form of expression of the compilation.

Finally, however, there is the treatment of copyright subsistence in the
Huffman compression table in the 1999 decision in Data Access v Powerflex
referred to above.® It will be recalled that notwithstanding its creation by use of
an “authoring” computer program, the High Court found sufficient originality
because the table nevertheless emanated from the substantial skill and judg-
ment of a director of the plaintiff who wrote the “authoring” program.™ The
High Court also held that the putative work was “a table expressed in figures
and symbols, and falls squarely within the statutory definition of a literary
work”.® The table itself was uniquely configured to work within the plaintiff's
retail Dataflex program and the table’s content and form was mechanistically
dictated by the operation of the algorithm upon a data set. The utilitarian
nature of the table certainly did not deny it status as an original literary work
in the High Court's 1999 holding. That holding though pre-dating IceTV » Nine
Network, was not explicitly qualified in IceTV v Nine Network, and means that
care must be taken in making too emphatic propositions about the need for
evaluative selection or conceptual arrangement in this area.

2.5.3 Computer programs

Computer programs are protected as literary works in Australian copyright
law, and in some respects the nature of that protection is akin to that afforded
to many tables and compilations in electronic form. The inclusion of computer
programs as a literary work is the only notable proprietary subject-matter
expansion by statutory reform since the enactment of the 1968 Act.

2.5.3.1 Evolution and relationship with integrated circuit layouts

For some time a debate was had as to the appropriate way to protect computer
programs. All copyright subject matter to that time was for ultimate consump-
tion by a human brain via eye, ear or both. Programs for computers were just
that: a set of instructions for a machine to perform. The classical distinction
between copyright pertaining more to the fine arts and patents more to the

useful arts - never zealously observed in the pragmatics of Anglo copyright
law - has been somewhat abandoned in the case of computer programs.
Neither the source code written by human programmers nor the 1s and 0s of
the binary object code (also called machine code) that source code is compiled
into so as to directly instruct a computer, are directed to a human reader. With
the mass retail of microprocessor-based computing from the late 1970s, the
debates that swirled around computer programs were not dissimilar to those
that were had at the end of the 19th century when things such as pianola rolls
emerged as discussed in Chapter 3 (see: 3.2) and Chapter 9 (see: 9.3). From.
the late 1970s, the question was being asked: could writing a set of instruc-
tions to a machine comprise authorship of a literary work? With computer
programs the most obvious alternative was sui generis protection. Copyright
protection, however, prevailed with TRIPS art 10(1) concisely mandating to
WTO members: “Computer programs, whether in source or object code, shall
be protected as literary works under the Berne Convention (1971).”*

However, a related sui generis protection was created at about this time
with the 1989 Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, and
its core articles are inscribed by reference into TRIPS.” Australia, while never
joining the 1989 treaty, meets its TRIPS obligations with the Circuit Layouts Act
1989 (Cth) which confers an intellectual property term of 10 years upon original
circuit layouts. A “circuit layout” is defined as a representation of the “three-
dimensional locations of the active and passive elements and interconnections”
of an integrated circuit (i.e. a chip of semiconductor material).* “Original” is
defined to mean the layout is the result of some “creative contribution” by
its maker and is not “commonplace”.*? A maker, however, may be a body
corporate; there is no necessity for human authorship.” The exclusive rights
are essentially against copying the layout or commercial dealings in copies
known to be unauthorised.*

Shortly after the passing of the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 the Full Federal
Court observed:

A chip, that is to say, an integrated circuit, may embody two different
subject matters of protection: a circuit layout and a copyright work. The
subject of copyright protection, usually a computer program, has protection
only under one Act, namely, the Copyright Act. The circuit layout itself has
protection under the Layouts Act.”

Thus, integrated circuits embodying a protected layout can comprise a physical
embodiment of a computer program (among other things, such as databases
and video games) and indeed the first Australian computer program litigation
involved computer programs embodied in integrated circuits. For a computer
program also reproduced in the layout of an integrated circuit, dual protection
as both a literary work in copyright and under the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 will
often exist.“ However, copyright law has emerged in Australia as the primary
body of law protecting computer code, whether as software or embodied in
an integrated circuit. Moreover, the important subject matter point is that the
passing of the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 involves no policy to negate copyright
subsistence in any literary work - whether a computer program or compilation
- embodied in an integrated circuit which corresponds to a protected layout.
Likewise, copyright subsistence in any embodied musical or dramatic work
remains unaffected by embodiment in an integrated circuit. However as noted
below, a circuit layout within the meaning of the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 can
not comprise an artistic work under the 1968 Act (see: 2.8) and it is noted in
Chapter 10 (see: 10.5.5) that an integrated circuit within the meaning of the
Circuit Layouts Act 1989 can not be the subject of a valid design registration
under the Designs Act 2003 (Cth). Also, and as will be flagged in Chapter
7 (see: 7.5.2), there is a parallel importation copyright exception for works
embodied in integrated circuits attached to a broad exhaustion principle within
the Circuit Layouts Act 1989. The protection afforded by the Circuit Layouts Act
1989 itself is discussed in Chapter 15 (see: 15.4) by way of overview.

The starting point of consideration of computer programs as subject
matter is the Apple Computer v Computer Edge litigation (spanning 1983-1986)
decided under the definition of literary work prior to any explicit statutory
countenancing of computer programs within it. The plaintiff claimed copy-
right ownership through authorship by its employee, a Mr Wigginton, of the
Applesoft and Autostart computer programs, written in source code, compiled
into machine code and in that latter form embodied within integrated circuits
ina microprocessor-based computing system that was branded as the Apple II.
The plaintiff claimed its rights on the basis that the source code and object

code were each literary works, or alternatively that the source code was a
literary work and the object code was an adaption of it (by translation), and
that the plaintiff owned rights in the adaptation. The plaintiff claimed that
the defendant had infringed its copyright by importing from Taiwan comput-
ing systems that included integrated circuits known by the defendant to be
reproductions of the plaintiff's works. In 1983 Beaumont J at trial held that no
copyright subsisted in the plaintiff's computer programs because the “function
of a computer programme is to control the sequence of operations carried out
by acomputer ... a contrast may properly be drawn between something which
is merely intended to assist the functioning of a mechanical device and literary
work so called”.” Beaumont J went on to distinguish between the source code
written by the programmer and the technically compiled object code of the
integrated circuits: “[t]he position is even stronger in the case of the object
programme ... this type of programme ... is at a more advanced stage of the
process of controlling the sequence of operations carried out by a computer” .*
The Full Federal Court reversed this decision in 1984, finding the source code
to be a literary work and (by majority) the object code in the silicon chip to be
an adaptation by translation, sufficient to give the plaintiff relief. In 1986 a
High Court majority, while agreeing with the Full Federal Court that the source
code was a literary work (being “a set of complex and precise instructions for
the manufacture of Apple I [integrated circuits]’”), reversed the Full Court
decision on the basis that the object code embodied by the integrated circuits
was not recognisable copyright subject matter - whether as its own literary
work or as an adaptation by translation of the source code literary work.

2.5.3.2 The 1984 reforms and Autodesk v Dyason

Shortly after the trial decision of Beaumont J in Apple Computer v Computer
Edge which denied recognition of computer programs as literary works,
the government announced that it would reform the law to accommodate
computer programs as literary works. The resulting 1984 reforms most
crucially amended the definition of literary work in s 10(1) to include “a
computer program or compilation of computer programs” - drafting which
remains current. At this time “computer program” was defined in terms (since
amended) to mean:

an expression, in any language, code or notation, of a set of instructions

(whether with or without related information) intended, either directly or
after either or both of the following:

(a) conversion to another language, code or notation;
(b) reproduction in a different material form,

to cause a device having digital information processing capabilities to
perform a particular function.”

Finally, the concept of adaptation which is explored in Chapter 6 (see: 6.8)
was augmented with a new fifth category: a version of a computer program
(whether or not in the language, code or notation in which the work was origi-
nally expressed) not being a reproduction - a reform which remains current.”

From the facts in Apple Computer v Computer Edge it seems likely that had
these reforms applied to that dispute the Applesoft and Autostart source
programs would have been treated as literary works, authored by Apple’s
Mr Wigginton. The integrated circuits inside the Apple II would have embod-
ied those source code programs by being a “conversion” to object code and
would have been authorised reproductions of the works in a “different mate-
rial form”. The integrated circuits inside the defendant's imported computers
would have been unauthorised reproductions of the Applesoft and Autostart
literary works. It also seems likely under this drafting that rights in adaptations
would not have arisen because the integrated circuits with their embodied
object code were reproductions of the works.

As noted earlier, the emergence in TRIPS of art 10(1) and its requirement
to protect computer programs as literary works caused no Australian law
reform because of these reforms 10 years earlier. However, two other matters
from around the time of TRIPS had a more lasting impact upon Australian
copyright law. The first was the Autodesk v Dyason litigation which spanned
1989 to 1993. The second was the publication of the CLRC’s Computer Software
Protection 1994 final report. As will be explained in Chapter 5 (see: 5.3.2)
Autodesk v Dyason is a point of departure for the modern Australian law on
what is a “substantial part” taking for the purposes of s 14. In this context the
litigation provides important background to some of the recommendations in
the 1994 CLRC report - which itself has the added feature that a member of
the Autodesk v Dyason Full Federal Court that was reversed by the High Court,
the Hon Ian Sheppard, served as the chair of the CLRC in an extra-judicial
capacity.

In Autodesk v Dyason the plaintiff, Autodesk, retailed a computer-aided
drafting (CAD) computer program branded as AutoCAD software to busi-
ness customers and had instituted an early form of technological protection
measure over it. The plaintiff's hardware device, the AutoCAD lock, was
required to be plugged into a computer loaded with AutoCAD software in
order for the software to run. The AutoCAD lock device, sold by the plaintiff
with each authorised copy of the AutoCAD software, comprised an inte-
grated circuit which embodied in object code an encrypted look-up table. A

sub-program of the AutoCAD software - which was in fact a compilation of
computer programs - was referred to in the litigation as Widget C. The role
of the Widget C sub-program was as a gatekeeper: to check against a decimal
equivalent table stored within it to ensure that the correct look-up table was
embedded in the plugged-in integrated circuit within the lock device. Only
if it were in place would Widget C permit the full compilation of AutoCAD
programs to run. In practical terms the plaintiff realised that unauthorised
copying of its AutoCAD software was straightforward whereas in the 1980s
copying the necessary hardware plug-in lock device (and its encrypted look-up
table in object code) was not. The defendants, however, through a process
of reverse engineering were able to replicate the look-up table stored in the
integrated circuitry within the AutoCAD lock device and to manufacture
unauthorised lock devices, selling them under the brand name Auto-Key.
These were advertised to AutoCAD software users in the following way: “The
Auto-Key Hardware lock is guaranteed to run all releases of AutoCAD”.
At trial, Northrop J concluded that the look-up table embodied as object
code in the AutoCAD lock was a “computer program” within the 1984 defini-
tion. It was a “set of instructions” in the same way that a “set of traffic lights,
when operating, contain information which constitutes instructions”, and thus
was a literary work.” As such, the defendants had, by making the Auto-Key,
reproduced that work in whole. The Full Federal Court reversed this decision.
It rejected the trial judge’s computer program characterisation of the table
in the AutoCAD lock on policy grounds: “It would be quite undesirable if
one took such a wide view of [the 1984 reforms] that one detected computer
programs in devices which in reality could not be said to fall within the words
of the definition” .”* Rather, the Full Court considered that there was no doubt
that “the WIDGET C program and the device in the lock as an integrated
system” constituted the relevant computer program under the 1984 reforms.”
This led into the Full Court’s conclusion that the look-up table in the defend-
ants’ Auto-Key did not take a substantial part of that computer program so
conceived. Therefore the respondents did not infringe notwithstanding the
appropriation of the core functionality of the AutoCAD lock. The High Court
at first unanimously reversed the Full Federal Court.” It found the plaintiff's
relevant computer program to be the Widget C gatekeeping sub-program
alone. It also found that “the set of instructions for Widget C in source code

... contain in decimal form precisely the same sequence produced in binary
form” by the defendants’ in their Auto-Key device: the look-up table.*t While
the look-up table was found, by itself, not to amount to a “set of instructions”,
it was nonetheless considered a substantial part of the Widget C sub-program
and this led to an infringement finding.* The outcome was endorsed when
rejecting an unusual application by the defendants to vacate was entertained
by the High Court.® In that application the defendants claimed a denial of
natural justice at the first High Court hearing and sought a rehearing. The
issue on rehearing was that before the Full Federal Court it was “common
ground” that the defendants had not reproduced any part of the Widget C
sub-program.* The application for a rehearing was refused by majority with
Mason C], in dissent, stating “I am inclined to the view that it is arguable that
the ... look-up table is simply data or information which is accessed and used
by the instructions that constitute the program Widget C”, and that it was
therefore arguable that there was no infringement.

Autodesk 0 Dyason was an unsatisfactory precedent and revealed that the
1984 reforms did not provide sufficient predictive certainty. The case will be
returned to in Chapter 5 (see: 5.3.2). The three court levels each identified a
different computer program to be the literary work in issue: the look-up table
at trial; the “Widget C program and the device in the lock as an integrated
system” by the Full Court; the Widget C sub-program in isolation by the High
Court. Quite possibly the trial judge and High Court were predisposed to give
Autodesk relief, if that was possible within a purposive reading of the 1984
reforms, because (to use the language of yet-to-come 21st century liability) the
defendants were selling a device that circumvented an Autodesk access control
technological protection measure that had clear anti-piracy “self-help” merit.
However, it is possible also to have sympathy for the defendants faced with a
literary work the parameters of which were in a state of flux across the court
levels, and it seems probable enough that had the matter been re-heard by the
High Court at least Mason CJ would have found no infringement.

2.5.3.3 CLRC Report and Data Access v Powerflex

In almost parallel with the Autodesk » Dyason litigation (which spanned 1989 to.
1993) was an inquiry by the CLRC that was announced in 1988 and concluded in
1994. The 1988 terms of reference for the inquiry were: “Whether the Copyright
Act 1968, as amended by the Copyright Amendment Act 1984, adequately and
appropriately protects computer programs in human and machine-readable
forms, works created by or with the assistance of computer programs, and
works stored in computer memory” .® The failure to implement the CLRC’s

recommendations pertaining to computer-generated material was discussed
above (see: 2.2). On the core subject matter question, the CLRC recommended.
that Australia retained the literary work classification of computer programs
but should replace the 1984 definition of a computer program with the defini-
tion added to the US Copyright Act 1976 in 1980.’ This recommendation was
effectively enacted in the Digital Agenda Reforms of 2000 and remains current
law: “computer program means a set of statements or instructions to be used
directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result”.
This was put not to fundamentally change “the underlying concept”, but
rather to clarify core meaning.’ Aside from arguments related purely to the
benefits of harmonisation with the US, the CLRC justified its recommendation
as follows:

The Committee believes that the US definition, by using the words ‘to be
used directly or indirectly in a computer’, covers programs written in source
code, object code and microcode. Accordingly, it disposes of any uncertainty
whether protection is limited to when the program code is visible. Also, the
inclusion of the word ‘statements’ clearly extends the scope of the definition
to cover programs written in declarative programming languages.”
Data Access Corporation v Powerflex is an important authority, which has been
discussed above both in relation to the necessity for human authorship of a
work (see: 2.2) and the originality attributes necessary for copyright subsistence
ina table or compilation (see: 2.5.2.2). The case primarily concerned the concept
of what is a computer program as literary work subject matter. The litigation
spanned 1996 to 1999, and thus occurred in the wake of the CLRC report but
predated the CLRC-initiated reform to the computer program definition.
The plaintiff, Data Access, was retailing to business consumers a data-
base-developer computer program branded as Dataflex and the defendant,
Powerflex, was a competitor marketing a rival substitute computer program,
PFXplus. At trial the defendant had been found to have infringed the literary
work copyright owned by the plaintiff in the Dataflex program by appropriat-
ing within PFXplus 55 of Dataflex’s so-called “reserved word” commands and
their function. The reserved words were unique “macro” commands that trig-
gered a sequence of other functions to be executed. The High Court listed 38 of
the appropriated 55 reserve words: “BOX”; “CHART”; “CHECK”; “CLEAR”;
“INDICATOR’; “INSERT”; “LOOP”; “NAME”; “PAD”; “PALETTE”; “PLOT”;
“POINTS”; “REQUIRED” ; “RETAIN”; “SELECTION”; “STATUS”; “TOTAL”;
“UNLOCK”; “AUTOFIND”; AUTOPAGE”; AUTORETURN” ; “BACKFIELD”;
“PAGEBREAK”; “PAGECHECK”; “PAGECOUNT”; “SAVE_GRAPHIC”;

“SET_LINE_STYLE”; “SKIPFOUND”; “WINDOWINDEX”; “DIRECTORY”;
“SAVE”; “FILELIST”; “MAKE_FILE”; “RUNPROGRAM"; “SAVERECORD”;
“ENTAGAIN”; “KEYPROC” and “MOVEINT”. Both the Full Federal Court
and the High Court rejected the trial judge’s finding of infringement by that
appropriation. Central to that rejection was a clear statement as to what
comprised a computer program as a literary work. The High Court held:
[Something is not a ‘computer program’ within the meaning of the defi-
nition in s 10(1) unless it intends to express, either directly or indirectly,
an algorithmic or logical relationship between the function desired to
be performed and the physical capabilities of the ‘device having digital
information processing capabilities’. Thus, in the sense employed by the
definition, a program in object code causes a device to perform a particular
function ‘directly’ when executed. A program in source code does so ‘after
... conversion to another language, code or notation’ ... Once these princi-
ples are applied to each reserved word in the Dataflex language, it is clear
that they are not ‘computer programs’. Each reserved word comprises but
a single instruction in that language. Each reserved word, considered alone,
is not a ‘set of instructions’ in that language. It is not a ‘computer program’
expressed in the Dataflex language.
This holding controlled the outcome of no infringement of the plaintiff's
program: infringement required the taking with some particularity the code
or at least the expressed structural logic of a set of instructions. In the course
of its opinion the High Court made clear that information or data alone, such
as a reserved word, cannot comprise a computer program unless it expresses
a logical instruction set. Likewise, functionality associated with a reserved
word is not within the scope of the expressive protection given to a work in
copyright. While the source code underlying that reserve word which controls
its functionality will comprise either its own computer program or at least
an aspect of the Dataflex computer program as a set of relevant instructions,
as will be explained in Chapter 5 (see: 5.3.2) no such code was taken by the
defendant. It is clear enough under the approach taken by the High Court in
Data Access Corporation v Powerflex that the Autodesk v Dyason look-up table,
as opposed to the Widget C gatekeeping sub-program, was not a computer
program and that the functionality of neither the look-up table nor Widget C
was protectable in copyright.

2.5.3.4 Digital storage and sub-programs

In the 21st century the High Court has not had occasion to revisit the concept of
computer programs as a sub-set literary work category. There have, however,
been two important subject matter issues that the Federal Court has delivered
opinions on.

The first involves whether digital files storing content - such as a “pdf”
file or a“ .mp3" file - is in and of itself a computer program, as opposed to any

software which encodes the file or renders the file. This was answered in the
negative in Australian Video Retailers v ) Varner Home Video where Emmett J held
that the material on a DVD disc that constitutes a computer program did “not
extend to the audio, visual and caption content” .** While this seems as a policy
matter to be the correct outcome, there might be a more satisfactory way to
deal with such questions after IceTV v Nine Network. Typically such storage files
are encoded and produced entirely by machine-based processes. Therefore,
under the emerging strictness being placed upon the need for human autho-
rial originality proximate to a work’s particular expression, it might be more
cogent to approach such digital storage files as lacking sufficient originality
to ever be a work.*

The other issue was touched on in Autodesk v Dyason with the Widget C
gate-keeping sub-program. To what extent do such sub-programs, whether
they be termed macros or interoperating application files (“apps”), comprise
their own computer program literary work? It will be recalled that ultimately
the High Court identified Widget C as the computer program that had been
infringed by the making of the Dyason Auto-Key with its embodied object
code. In Dais Studio v Bullet Creative Jessup J, dealing with content management
system software held that both the whole system was a computer program
literary work and individualised aspects therein that performed specific tasks
were also their own computer program literary work: a sub-program file for
table-making and another sub-program file for editing.” The fact that such
component programs had to interoperate with the whole content manage-
ment system to perform their tasks did not preclude their status as computer
programs. Relying on the text of the new (US-derived) definition, Jessup J said
of the table file and the editor file:

As a matter of ordinary language, a thing might be used to bring about
a certain result notwithstanding that it is but a component in a collection
or sequence of things which together bring about the result. It may be
accurately said that a brake pedal is used to arrest the progress of a car,
notwithstanding that the pedal alone would be incapable of achieving that
result. It may also be accurately said that soap powder is used to clean the
family wash, notwithstanding that the desired result could not be brought
about by the application of dry powder alone.

This approach was accepted and applied by Bennett J in CA o ISI.” There
macros, sets of instructions triggered by a unique command to perform a
particular task, within a wider database management system were found to
comprise their own subject matter as computer program literary works: “The
fact that the [macros] require the participation of other components in order

to bring about a result in the mainframe computer does not disqualify the
[macros] from being a computer program” .**

26 Dramatic works

In the history of Anglo copyright the Statute of Anne 1709 recognised nothing
other than rights of control over the making of copies of books and other writ-
ings subject matter soon held to include musical composition but rights did not
include the exclusive right of public performance.” A public performance right
for “dramatic literary property” was first introduced by statute in 1833, where
the subject matter was denoted as “tragedy, comedy, play, opera, farce or any
other dramatic piece or entertainment”. This exclusive right was extended
to musical works in 1842.°°% However literary works remained without public
performance rights until the passing of the 1911 Act.” Thus the 1878 Royal
Commission observed that “in books there is only one copyright, in musical
and dramatic works there are two, namely, the right of printed publication
and the right of public performance”. Thus a literary work in legal history is
conceived of as a work to be consumed by a reading public; in contradistinc-
tion a dramatic work and a musical work were conceived of as works that were
also consumed by public audiences and therefore, of their nature, inherently
suitable for public performance. This history is telling because it highlights
essential differences and similarities that persist in modern Australian law. It
also hints at genres that are inherently difficult to classify as either a literary
or dramatic work: poetry and lyrics. For example, is Oscar Wilde’s The Ballad
of Reading Gaol a literary (reading) work or a dramatic (performance) work?
While this is largely an academic question as literary and dramatic works
receive the same copyright term and bundle of rights, as will be explained
it might have some practical significance on the legal question of whether a
particular exploitation is an exercise of the reproduction or adaptation right.

2.6.1 Statutory language

In the 1911 Act, a dramatic work was defined to include “any piece for
recitation, choreographic work or entertainment in dumb show, the scenic
arrangement or acting form of which is fixed in writing or otherwise, and

any cinematograph production where the arrangement or acting form or the
combination of incidents represented give the work an original character” 1°
Because of uncertainty as to whether the British law conception of dramatic
literary property included choreography (or other such art forms that did
not involve spoken or sung words) which the 1908 Berne revision required,
“choreographic work or entertainment in dumb show” was inserted to ensure
Berne compliance.’ In essence this inclusion remains in Australian current
law”

The first commercial exhibition of cinematograph film had occurred in
Paris in the final decade of the 19th century, and the 1908 revision to the Berne
Convention also obliged members to protect cinematographic productions
“as literary or artistic works if by the arrangement of the acting form or the
combination of the incidents represented, the author has given the work a
personal and original character” °° The Gorell Committee concluded this was
“reasonable” and recommended its adoption “although it introduces new
matter into the area of protection”. Clearly a pragmatic drafting decision
was subsequently made to include cinematographic productions within the
category of dramatic works, and to define its subject matter scope by use of
Berne language." What was required for a film to have an “original character”?
As the Gregory Committee noted in 1951: “The difficulty of deciding what
constitutes originality in such cases must be manifest; on any definition some
types of films, e.g. newsreels, would seem to be deprived of copyright protec-
tion, though there seems to be no equitable reason why they should be.”#* In
1999 Lindgren J was required to decide whether film of the 1956 Melbourne
Olympic Games had such a character and (consistent with an earlier Canadian
authority on film of football matches which considered the same statutory
language) concluded that the cinematographing of a series of sporting events
in real life did not have the requisite character.

The 1948 Berne revision extended more mainstream protection to
“cinematographic works and works produced by a process analogous to
cinematography”. As will be explained in the next chapter, this led to the crea-
tion of cinematograph film as non-authorial subject matter for the proprietary
copyright regime first in UK law and then in Australian law. This meant that
cinematographic productions needed to be clearly extracted from the dramatic
works category, whilst preserving recognition as a dramatic work any screen-
writer’s contribution. In the 1956 UK Act this was done with the following
drafting: “dramatic work ... does not include a cinematograph film, as distinct
from the scenario or script for a cinematograph film” ” This language was
essentially replicated in the 1968 Act, but with the emphasis altered.

Thus taken together, the revisions to Berne in 1908 and 1948 triggered
changes in British law which best explain the contours of the modern Australian
definition in s 10(1) of our 1968 Act:

dramatic work includes:

(a) achoreographic show or other dumb show; and

(b) ascenario or script for a cinematograph film;

but does not include a cinematograph film as distinct from the scenario or

script for a cinematograph film.
Importantly, and similar to the literary work definition, this merely makes clear
what is included (or in the case of cinematograph film, no longer included)
without defining the mainstream matter - such as a play script - which is
clearly and uncontroversially included. Understandably, the jurisprudence on
dramatic works as subject matter concerns things closer to the boundaries of
the category.

2.6.2 Marginal dramatic work subject matter

It might be recalled that the originality relevant to the copyright in works is
the expressive form of the work, and not the underlying idea for a work of that
type. It is this issue that has been brought front of mind for the dramatic work
copyright argued to subsist in television program formats. Thus the Privy
Council, upholding a New Zealand Court of Appeal decision, found in Green
v Broadcasting Corporation of New Zealand that the structural format of a largely
unscripted television talent program was outside the scope of what might be
regarded as a dramatic work. The central reasoning in its short decision was:

The subject matter of the copyright claimed for the ‘dramatic format’ of

Opportunity Knocks is conspicuously lacking in certainty. Moreover, it seems

to their Lordships that a dramatic work must have sufficient unity to be
capable of performance and that the features claimed as constituting the
‘format’ of a television show, being unrelated to each other except as acces-
sories to be used in the presentation of some other dramatic or musical
performance, lack that essential characteristic.”
This decision was applied in a 2017 UK decision which found that the written
synopsis for a proposed television game show program, Minute Winner, to
also not comprise a dramatic work. One example (of four) described in the
synopsis was:
IN A CLOTHES SHOP. The host stops a customer at random inside the shop
and gives her/him one minute to choose a set of clothes, go to the dressing
room and try them on. If the clothes fit and the person has put them all [on]
in one minute she/he wins the clothes."®

The trial judge, on interlocutory hearing, found that the plaintiff had “no
realistic prospect” of persuading a court that the contents of the synopsis could
comprise a dramatic work:

Those contents are both very unclear and lacking in specifics, and even
taken together they did not identify or prescribe anything resembling a
coherent framework or structure which could be relied upon to reproduce
a distinctive game show in recognisable form.”

Against these decisions are a pair of Australian cases in which both parties
were involved in the formulation of television program formats, and in which
a pioneer claimed a competitor was an infringer. In the first, Nine Films and
Television v Ninox Television - involving two reality renovation game programs
~ the alleged infringer brought a successful groundless threat action which
did not seemingly involve any suggestion that the threat-maker’s program.
format failed the Green v Broadcasting Corporation of New Zealand criteria.”
The groundlessness arose from the lack of “any substantial reproduction
or similarity” between the two programs.” In Seven Network (Operations) v
Endemol Australia - involving two reality cooking game programs - which
was a hearing for interlocutory injunctive relief, the alleged infringer accepted
the possibility of dramatic work subsistence in a show format generally but
did not admit such subsistence in the case of the plaintiff's particular cooking
show because it was an “unimaginative collection of unoriginal ideas and
situations found in earlier reality television programs” +” The trial judge, while
refusing interlocutory relief on balance of convenience grounds, thought that
the plaintiff had “a reasonably arguable case” but not a “strong prima facie

case”. When the show format being sought protection for is a competitive
television game show, in which the format substantively comprises the rules
governing the game, the general limitation upon copyright protection should
apply: only the particular expression of the game rules can be the work, and
not the broad idea for or parameters of the game.**

There have been other dramatic work cases dealing with peripheral subject
matter. A fireworks display as dramatic work subject matter was regarded
with scepticism by Hill] on an urgent interlocutory injunction brought shortly
prior to New Year's Eve in late 1999. However, the judge’s resistance to the
proposition was not given a cogent basis and Hill J conceded that his scepti-
cism “does not mean copyright might not exist ... it may be that no one has
thought deeply about the issue”. A subsequent journal article published
in 2011 evidences some such deep thought, and reproduces a “fireworks
script” which denotes when each pyrotechnic is set off and coinciding with a
particular musical work.” In view of that scholarship, it is difficult to avoid
the conclusion that a fireworks display can properly fall within the dramatic
work category, subject to matters such as originality being satisfied.

In Aristocrat Leisure Industries v Pacific Gaming Tamberlin J considered the
plaintiff’s submission that the specifications underpinning the games loaded
on its electronic gambling machines comprised dramatic works. Within
the gaming machines, aside from the animated spinning reels aspect, were
animated racing-style interactive video games - a so-called “second-screen
features”. Were the specifications, at least with respect to the video racing
games, a dramatic work? In a thoughtful decision, Tamberlin J rejected the
plaintiff's submission, finding as a definitional matter there to be no dramatic
work:

[T]here is a minimum requirement of some type of performance. This
performance need not in my view be that of human beings. For example,
a script of an animated cartoon, such as South Park or The Simpsons, may
well be a dramatic work because it calls for performance by characters.
In the present case, while it is possible that the video races, taken in isola-
tion, could be described as cinematograph films the specifications for the
Aristocrat Games lack the element of performance by characters, and are
insufficiently predetermined, to amount to ‘dramatic works’. There is no
apparent plot, nor is there any choreography, script, characterisation or
interaction between characters and there is a strong element of unpredict-
ability and randomness. None of these elements are essential or individually

determine the question but, weighing them cumulatively, I am led to the
conclusion that the specifications do not give rise to any dramatic work.”

This reasoning and conclusion seem correct from both doctrinal and policy
perspectives. Also seemingly correct was the short shrift given to the argument
made in the UK case of Creation Records v News Group Newspapers, that a scene
involving objects and people arranged around and in a swimming pool - a
kind of tableau vivant - comprised a dramatic work. Lloyd J dismissed the argu-
ment summarily “since the scene is inherently static, having no movement,
story or action, I cannot accept this [is a dramatic work]”.° Such an example
brings to the foreground the importance of the defining historical attribute of
dramatic and musical works: their inherent suitability for some type of public
performance.

27 Musical works

In a brief 1777 judgment, Lord Mansfield emphatically resolved ambiguity

over whether the scope of the Statute of Anne conferred a right to control the

print copying of musical compositions:
[T]he case was so clear and the arguments such, that it was difficult to
speak seriously upon it. The words of the Act of Parliament are very large:
“books and other writings.” It is not confined to language or letters. Music
is a science; it may be written; and the mode of conveying the ideas, is
by signs and marks ... If the narrow interpretation contended for in the
argument were to hold, it would equally apply to algebra, mathematics,
arithmetic, hieroglyphics. All these are conveyed by signs and figures. There
is no colour for saying that music is not within the Act?

As noted above, in 1842 the public performance rights that had in 1833 been
conferred on dramatic works, were extended to musical compositions.
However, the 1842 Act did not define “musical composition” .™ Legislation
in 1902 conferred jurisdiction on lower courts to order that pirated copies
of musical works be delivered up for destruction.** That legislation defined
“musical work” to mean “any combination of melody and harmony, or either
of them, printed, reduced to writing, or otherwise graphically produced or
reproduced” It was this definition that was essentially incorporated into the
1905 Australian Copyright Act. However, neither the regime of the 1911 Act
nor the current 1968 Act defines a “musical work”.

2.74 A case-based definition of music

In view of the absence of definition in Australian copyright statute law, perhaps
the concept of music is regarded as almost irreducible as far as statutory
language is concerned. In Sawkins v Hyperion Records Patten J at trial adopted
the following description of a musical work:

[T]he product of the mind of a human author which is intended to be
performed by the production of a combination of sounds to be appreciated
by the ear for reasons other than linguistic content, the originality of the
work resulting from the exercise of substantial independent skill, judg-
ment or creative labour expended on its creation as opposed to its mere
interpretation.*

This description seems cogent and the final expression “mere interpretation” is
intended to exclude the contribution of a “performance style” from the scope of
what is the musical work.’” The expression “appreciated by the ear for reasons
other than linguistic content” in this description also highlights that in the case
of songs there are two works of authorship: the lyrics, which are perhaps most
obviously a dramatic work, although treated as literary work as an industry
norm; and the music absent the lyrics which comprises a musical work. It
seems clear enough that this works-duality of a song has long been an aspect
of Anglo-Australian copyright law. Choreography or dramatic works more
expansive than song lyrics (a libretto in musical theatre, for instance) would
also stand as their own dramatic works, separate from any musical work with
which they are associated. In 1988 this accepted position was effectively codi-
fied in the UK, so that the definition of musical work excluded “any words or
action intended to be sung, spoken or performed with the music” 1’ However,
the question has lingered in the case of songs: to what extent should the sung
sound of lyrics be assimilated as part of the musical work?

2.7.2 Lyrics as an aspect of a musical work

Notwithstanding the in-principle purity of separating out the various associ-
ated works, challenges are presented in dividing a line between the two works
that typically comprise a song. A UK judge in the 1987 case of I Villiamson
Music v Pearson Partnership was troubled by there being any “absolute divi-
sion” between them:

Itis, I think, misleading to think of them in mutually exclusive compartments.
The words by themselves are or may be the subject of literary copyright. But

those same words when sung are to me part of the music. After all one gets
enjoyment from hearing a song sung in a language with which one is totally
unfamiliar. The enjoyment could well be diminished if the vocal line were
replaced by another instrument, e.g., the piano or a flute.”

In 2003 this statement was qualified by another UK judge, Blackburne J who
when deciding Hayes v Phonogram Limited stated:

Iunderstand those observations to mean no more than that the human voice
can constitute a part of the overall orchestration of a musical work, much
like a musical instrument in a band or an orchestra. I do not think that the
judge was intending to say that the words of the song, ie. the literary work,
can in some way forma part of the musical work but, if he was, I respectfully
disagree. Over and above that, one must beware of confusing the way in
which the work is performed with the work itself.

Blackburne J’s comments are insightful in shedding light upon the distinction
between the two works that typically pertain to a song, and the performance
of both. A human voice can constitute a part of the overall orchestration of the
musical work, but a human performance style is a non-authorial contribution.
However in Boomerang Investments v Padgett Perram J in 2020 weighed into
this issue essentially on the side of IVilliamson Music v Pearson Partnership,
while accepting the caution from Hayes v Phonogram Limited about keeping
out performance style being a factor.# Perram J held that lyrics should be
“[v]iewed as instructions to the singer on what sounds to make with the
mouth” and that “the words of a song could not, in my view, more obviously
be part of a musical work” +” This led to the conclusion that “in assessing the
qualities of the musical work one should put from one’s mind the qualities of
the words qua literary work but excluding the instrumentation for the human
voice seems entirely unsound” ** As such the phonetics of the lyric “love is in
the air” was characterised as comprising part of the plaintiffs’ musical work.
How practical such an approach is to the characterisation of musical works
that have accompanying lyrics (i.e. songs) is an open question. As is explained
in Chapter 6 what amounts to a substantial part taking from a musical work
is already a fraught area of copyright law, and indeed almost consists of its
own sub-category.*# Regarding lyrics to be an authorial contribution to the
original expression of a musical work is not a legal development that leads to
greater coherence or predictive certainty. So that while the position expressed
by Blackburne J in 2003 is preferable, the Perram J view has been applied
(although somewhat tepidly) by another first instance judge where the plaintiff
had adopted Perram J's view and the defendant had not contested it**

2.8 Artistic works

At the other extreme from the musical work’s absent statutory definition is the
artistic work which has an exhaustive definition involving three broad types
of work: (i) works of visual art - irrespective of “artistic quality”; (ii) works of
architecture - also irrespective of “artistic quality”; and (iii) works of artistic
craftsmanship — whether or not falling within the other two categories.“ The
history of how these three broad categories came to comprise the Australian
law is informative.

The first category, visual art, has its statutory roots in the period from 1735
to 1862 when English law incrementally expanded protection Act by Act. The
first technical means by which drawings could be mass reproduced was by
printing from engraved and etched plates upon which the drawing had been
made. In 1735 a copyright term of 14 years was conferred to etchers and engrav-
ers of “historical or other prints”, with the etched or engraved plate serving the
same role in early copyright law as the author's manuscript.” Then in 1798
sculptors too first received a 14-year term of copyright protection.“ Finally in
1862 painters, drawers and photographers first received - consistent with the
copyright term for literary authors under the 1842 Act - a term of protection for
life of the artist and seven years. So that at the end of this period essentially
all the subject matter varieties that comprise the first category of artistic work
had been established. They were then carried forward into the 1911 Act which
consolidated and codified all British copyright law.*” In the 1956 UK Act they
were grouped as the first category of artistic works - paintings, sculptures,
drawings, engravings or photographs - and this provided the basis for the
Australian drafting.*

The second category, architecture, was introduced in the 1911 Act by
reason of the 1908 Berne revision which required that “architecture” be put
within the scope of protected “literary and artistic works”. As first enacted
an “architectural work of art” was defined to mean “any building or structure
having an artistic character or design, in respect of such character or design, or
any model for such building or structure, provided that the protection afforded
by this Act shall be confined to the artistic character and design, and shall not

extend to processes or methods of construction” .* In the 1956 UK Act, this
became simply “works of architecture, being either buildings or models for
building” which provided the drafting bones for the second category in the
1968 Act.

For both the first two categories the 1968 definition makes plain that the
designated subject matter is included whether or not it is of “artistic qual-
ity”. The origins of this clarification can be found in the Gregory Committee
Report. It recommended that items such as engineers’ drawings should be
included within the first artistic work category provided that they were
original in the Valter v Lane sense - that is, made by “the skill or labour” of
the draftsperson.” There should be no requirement of artistic merit in the
“fine art” sense. However, this was only recommended for and inserted
into the 1956 UK Act for the first category. The Australian Spicer Committee
recommended this clarification also apply to architecture, the second category:
“Tt seems to us, however, that Article 2(1) of the Berne Convention requires
all works of architecture to be protected. In any case, we think it undesirable
that the existence of copyright in this case should require a finding that the
work has an artistic character.”*” This recommendation was adopted in the
1968 Act. The “whether ... of artistic quality or not” language of the first two
categories of the artistic work definition has the purpose of preserving | Valter
» Lane originality to support subsistence in subject matter such as technical
drawings, maps and architectural works.

The third category, the work of artistic craftsmanship, emerged for the
first time in the 1911 Act with neither Berne obligation nor Gorrell Committee
recommendation directed to its protection. An account of its origins was
provided by Lord Simon in his 1974 decision in George Hensher v Restawile
Upholstery.°* The subject matter came about from the Arts and Craft move-
ment that took form in the UK in the 1860s, and which created a heightened
appreciation of the integration of artistry within functional objects; the applied
or decorative arts. Lord Simon’s account explained the essence of the move-
ment's ideology to be:

[T]hat ‘art’ did not mean merely, or even primarily, the fine arts. Art was
a way of life, standing in contrast to the prevailing life of industrialism
and commercialism, which was seen as a threat to mankind's spiritual and
physical well-being.
In Lord Simon's judgment there was “no doubt that, when Parliament, in 1911,
gave copyright protection to works of artistic craftsmanship, it was extending
to works of applied art the protection formerly restricted to works of the fine

arts, and was doing so under the influence of the Arts and Crafts movement”
This protection was carried forward to the 1956 UK Act and into the 1968
Act. However as originally inserted into the 1956 and 1968 Acts, the defini-
tion of artistic work was confined to works of artistic craftsmanship to which
neither of the other two categories applied. In the 1968 Act this was changed
in 2003 - for reasons related to the operation of the copyright/ design overlap
exception - so that since that reform works of artistic craftsmanship are no
longer mutually exclusive with subject matter in the other two categories."

2.8.1 The first (a) category: visual art

The first category comprises: paintings; sculptures; drawings; engravings;
photographs. All except the first of these is separately defined.

2.8.1.1 Paintings

Paintings, together with drawings and photographs, have been protected in
English copyright law since an 1862 enactment, yet neither that Act, nor any
successor copyright legislation has defined the term “painting”. Without a
definition, and almost no jurisprudence on the metes and bounds of what
it might comprise, its legal meaning is open to argument. The Gregory
Committee Report expressed a view that term should refer merely to the way
in which the work is made and should impose no particular artistic merit.
The UK Court of Appeal has suggested under the 1988 UK Act that while
some types of artistic works, such as a drawing to be used as a technical plan,
might only have practical utility “a painting which (however bad it may be in
artistic terms) is unlikely to be anything but decorative” 1® It is unclear what
is excluded by the term. Would the restorative spray painting of a car panel by
a repairer constitute a painting as much as a work by Howard Arkley? Conti J
had no difficulty in finding that the use of calligraphy to produce Chinese
character pictograms resulted in a painting. Relying on a textbook definition of
painting as “a roughly two-dimensional work of expressive form ona surface”
the court reasoned that “[t]he use of the Chinese brush pen on traditional
Chinese rice paper by [the author] was sufficiently expressive to bring into being
a painting for the purposes of copyright protection”

On the other hand Merchandising Corporation of America v Harpbond is a
notorious UK authority that also deals with the meaning of “painting” and

involved the stylised face paint of a pop music performer whose stage name
was Adam Ant. His face paint was found not to comprise a painting and
therefore lacked any protection as an artistic work under the 1956 UK Act.
Lawton J, for the Court of Appeal, held that “it was fantastic to suggest that
make-up on anyone's face could possibly be a painting” 1° This was because
a “painting” required an inanimate surface; it was “an object” .** On this quite
restrictive approach neither make-up art nor possibly even a tattoo could be a
painting because it lacked a requisite surface.”

The approach in Merchandising Corporation of America can be understood
within a broader concern of copyright law: that artistic work copyright protec-
tion does not become so unwieldy as to cause inconvenience to many and
embarrassment to the law. This is a consideration that helps to explain the
absence of certain exclusive rights for artistic works, and the exceptions that
apply only in relation to artistic works - in particular those dealing with the
overlap between design and copyright protection. It can be said for the
moment that this general approach would lead away froma court finding that
a repairer using spray paint on a damaged car had the same status of a visual
artist such as Howard Arkley who worked with spray paint.

2.8.1.2 Sculptures

As noted above after engravers and etchers in 1735, the next visual artists who
received statutory copyright protection were sculptors in 1798 with a 14-year
term for models and casts of busts of representations of human and animal
form. An additional 14 years was granted in 1814 if the sculptor was alive at
the expiry of the first term. In the 1814 Act the protection of the 1798 Act was
extended to:

any new and original sculpture, or model, or copy, or cast of the human
figure or human figures, or of any bust or busts, or of any part or parts of the
human figure, clothed in drapery or otherwise, or of any animal or animals,
or of any part or parts of any animal combined with the human figure or
otherwise, or of any subject being matter of invention in sculpture.“*
The implication of the 1814 Act’s language was that works of sculpture
resulted in statues. The 1911 Act did not, however, carry forward the 1814
Act's language and instead put within the definition of artistic works “works
of sculpture”, which in turn were defined to include “casts and models” 2” This
language was essentially carried forward by the 1956 and 1968 Acts, although
widened as noted above with the clarification (applicable to all works in the
first two categories) that this included sculpture irrespective of its “artistic

quality”.7* With some circularity the 1956 and 1968 Acts also added that
“sculpture” included casts or models “made for purposes of sculpture” 1”?
None of the statute law since 1911 has provided a practical definition of
“sculpture” for copyright purposes.’? Unfortunately, the Anglo-Australian
jurisprudence on the question of what sculpture is for copyright purposes
lacks coherence. Starting with IVham-O v Lincoln Industries in the mid-1980s
there have been seven notable cases, the most recent involving the Star 1Vars
stormtrooper helmet in 2012.

In} Vham-O v Lincoln Industries New Zealand courts considered whether a
plastic Frisbee was, or was a reproduction of, a work of sculpture. A wooden-
carved model was made from initial drawings. From the wooden model more
detailed plans were made in order to produce a metal mould from which
the final plastic items were made by injection moulding. The New Zealand
Court of Appeal concluded that the wooden model was a work of sculpture,
basing that conclusion primarily on the process by which the artefact was
made and adopting what the trial judge referred to as “its basic nature” 2” This
performative approach to sculpture relied on the following textbook passage:
“Prima facie [sculptures] are the product of the art of forming representa-
tions of things or abstract designs in the round or in relief by chiselling stone,
carving wood, modelling clay, casting metal, or similar processes” (emphasis
added).*° Having concluded that the metal mould was an “engraving”
(discussed below), and that the final plastic items were akin to “prints” made
from it, the court rejected characterising the end plastic Frisbees as works of
sculpture — as opposed to reproductions of the wooden sculpture — on the
basis that “it appears to us to be straining the meaning of the word ‘sculpture’
to apply it to the discs produced by the injection moulding process used in
the present case where the moulds concerned have simply been created by a
process of engraving” .”* However, and by way of obiter, the court also stated:
“a model which is a sculpture has been created and a cast or mould is later
made from that model for the purposes of reproducing the model in metal
and plastic or some other form then the articles so produced may be classified
as sculptures” .*” This distinction, while arbitrary, arguably accords with the
statutory language of sculpture including “casts” and is consistent with the

court's focus on whether something is a work of sculpture being controlled by
the method of making, rather than the nature of the artefact made.

The following year a UK judge considered the plaintiff's claim in Breville
Europe v Thorn EMI that plaster shapes were works of sculpture, even though
they were simply used to produce the moulds to manufacture the heating
plates of its sandwich toasting appliances. The defendant resisted this char-
acterisation and pointed to the language of the 1814 Act as denoting that
the intended scope of the modern sculpture concept required more classical
forms. Falconer J agreed with the plaintiff, in so doing supported the finding
in | Viam-O that the wooden model was sculpture and relied on the following
textbook passage which emphasised the Gregory Committee's rejection of
“fine art” limitations:

Since copyright may subsist irrespective of artistic quality it would seem
that, for example, carved wooden patterns intended for the purpose of
casting mechanical parts in metal or plastic might well be susceptible of
protection, although the point has not yet received much attention from
practitioners.”
Thus both Wham-O v Lincoln Industries and Breville Europe v Thorn EMI in
the mid-1980s can be seen as supporting a broad-church view of works of
sculpture. All that they required was a process involving some medium (e.g.
wood or plaster) and method (e.g. carving wood or shaping plaster) that was
sufficiently close sculpturing. The next three decisions tended against that
expansion.

Whitford J in the UK High Court rejected a characterisation of casts and
models used in dentistry as works of sculpture in J & S Davis (Holdings) v
Wright Health Group. Whitford J observed with concern that the breadth of the
“drawing” category had permitted a “remarkable extension of the protection
secured for engineering drawings” .” This breadth was non-accidental. It was
the direct result of the adoption of the Gregory Committee’s recommendation
in favour of protection regardless of artistic quality that was broadly consistent
with the I Valter » Lane conception of originality, and occurred in the “absence
of any developed law of unfair competition in this country”.®° However
Whitford J reasoned against any similar extension in the case of sculpture on
the basis of the statutory definitional requirement that casts or model be “made
for the purposes of sculpture”. On Whitford J's view, “[t]hese words cut
down the extent to which casts or models can secure protection as sculptures”
and removed items that comprised nothing more than production steps in the
manufacture of utilitarian objects.“* While the court (perhaps out of a sense of
comity) sought to distinguish the holding in } Viam-O that the wooden model

was sculpture, it seems clear enough that Whitford J considered that such
a model (a production step, for sure) could only be admitted as a work of
sculpture if the final artefact itself could be regarded as a work of sculpture in
a conventional sense.** Given a plastic Frisbee toy was found not to qualify as
sculpture by the NZ courts, logically that finding would disqualify the wooden
model under Whitford J’s reasoning.

In Greenfield Products v Rover-Scott Bonnar Pincus J of the Federal Court
considered a plaintiff's argument in relation to a ride-on motor mower that its
plastic componentry, and the moulds for those components, were sculptures.
Similar to Whitford J in J & S Davis (Holdings) v Wright Health Group, the Court
reasoned on the basis that “sculpture” should be given its “orthodox meaning”
and the plaintiff's argument was given short shrift:

It appears to me clear that neither the moulds nor the drive mechanism,
nor the parts of the latter, are sculptures in the ordinary sense. It is true, as
was pointed out in the course of argument, that some modern sculptures
consist of or include parts of machines, but that does not warrant the conclu-
sion that all machines and parts thereof are properly called sculptures, and
similar reasoning applies to moulds.*

Inasimilar vein Laddie J in Metix » G H Maughan (Plastics) rejected a claim that
industrial moulds used in the manufacture of plastic cartridges for hypodermic
syringes could comprise works of sculpture. Adopting a submission from
Richard Meade, counsel for a defendant, Laddie J stated:
It is not possible to say with precision what is and what is not sculpture,
but I think Mr Meade was close to the heart of the issue. He suggested
that a sculpture is a three-dimensional work made by an artist's hand. It
appears to me that there is no reason why the word ‘sculpture’ in the 1988
Act, should be extended far beyond the meaning which that word has to
ordinary members of the public.

On this basis the Court held that the moulds were not a sculpture because they
were not made by artists concerned with the aesthetics of shape or appearance;
rather the moulds were the product of industrial designers concerned with
“achieving a precise functional effect”.! Relying heavily upon this notion of
a “three-dimensional work made by an artist’s hand”, Angel J of the Northern
Territory Supreme Court in I Vildash v Klein had no difficulty in concluding
that novelty craft market items (e.g. “critters” being representations of local
animals, reptiles and insects) made by plaintiff Ms Deborah Wildash from
wire, beads, glass and crystal were works of sculpture:

They are three-dimensional craft pieces hand made with a degree of skill

in the medium employed which are designed to have aesthetic appeal to

potential purchasers. That some of the works in this case are also functional,
such as the wall and table candle holders and ‘mozzie coil’ holders, does not
prevent them being sculptures within the meaning of that term in the Act.”

This approach prioritises that the work posited as sculpture has three-
dimensional aesthetic form and downplays method or medium such as chisel-
ling stone, carving wood, modelling clay or casting metal.

While the leading Anglo authority on what is a sculpture is Lucasfilm v
Ainsworth, how it should be received in Australian law is an open question.
The relevant issue in the case was whether copyright subsisted in a full-face
plastic helmet, used as a costume prop by characters called stormtroopers in
the iconic film Star 1Vars. The plaintiff claimed to own the UK artistic work
copyright as a work of sculpture. It was clear that the helmet was created
from a process involving: drawings, the production in clay of a model helmet
head based on the drawings, and the production of the plastic helmet prop by
vacuum moulding. The nub of Mann J's decision at trial, which emerged as
the principles underpinning its acceptance on appeal, was:

It is of the essence of a sculpture that it should have, as part of its purpose,
a visual appeal in the sense that it might be enjoyed for that purpose alone,
whether or not it might have another purpose as well. The purpose is that
of the creator. This reflects the reference to ‘artist’s hand’ in the judgment
of Laddie J in Metix, with which I respectfully agree. An artist (in the realm
of the visual arts) creates something because it has visual appeal which
he wishes to be enjoyed as such. He may fail, but that does not matter (no
judgments are to be made about artistic merit). It is the underlying purpose
that is important.

The fact that the object has some other use does not necessarily disqualify
it from being a sculpture, but it still has to have the intrinsic quality of
being intended to be enjoyed as a visual thing. Thus the model soldier in
Britain might be played with, but it still, apparently, had strong purely
visual appeal which might be enjoyed as such. Similarly, the Critters in
Wildash had other functions, but they still had strong purely visual appeal.
It explains why the Frisbee itself should be excluded from the category,
along with the moulds in Metix and Davis. It would also exclude the wooden
model in IVham-O and the plaster casts in Breville, and I would respectfully
disagree with the conclusions reached by the judges in those cases that those
things were sculptures. Those decisions, in my view, would not accord with
the ordinary view of what a sculpture is, and if one asks why then I think
that the answer is that the products fail this requirement and the preceding
one - there is no intention that the object itself should have visual appeal for
its own sake, and every intention that it be purely functional.“

While this is cogent, the trial judge’s conclusion, supported unanimously on
appeal, that no artistic work copyright subsisted in the helmet as a work of
sculpture is anomalous." At its core this holding was on the remarkable basis

that: “[t]he helmet was utilitarian in the sense that it was an element in the
process of production of the film” .1° Clearly enough the features of shape
and configuration of the helmet were confected as a film costume prop to
contribute to the dramatic depiction of a science fiction screenplay. However
this underscored that the full-face stormtrooper’s helmet, modelled in clay
prior to final production in plastic, existed for its visual impact alone through
the medium of cinematograph film. As such, the “utilitarian” object conclusion
in Lucasfilm seems inconsistent with the abstract legal principles that Lucasfilm
stands for, and for that reason alone it needs to be regarded with care in
Australia. Moreover, under the 1988 UK Act a finding that copyright subsists
in a sculpture has a consequence in the area of copyright/design overlap
similar to a finding in Australia that that copyright subsists in a work of artistic
craftsmanship - loosely speaking the preservation of full copyright protection
as opposed to a broad exception to copyright.” Therefore, while the approach
to what is a work sculpture arrived at by Mann J's synthesis of the authorities
is persuasive, its application to render the stormtrooper helmet to be not a
work of sculpture seems impermissible under that very approach. However,
policy considerations tied to the UK copyright/ design overlap exception, with
a desire to confine full copyright protection to the finer arts, might be seen as
controlling the outcome.*”

From all this, the Metix definition of “a sculpture is a three-dimensional
work made by an artist's hand” emerges as mainstream law, accepted thus
far in Australia in 1 Vildash. Implicit in it is that the aesthetical aspirations of
the maker are the paramount consideration. Thus Mann J at trial in Lucasfilm
provided the following illustration: “[a] pile of bricks, temporarily on display
at the Tate Modern for 2 weeks, is plainly capable of being a sculpture” whereas
the “identical pile of bricks dumped at the end of my driveway for 2 weeks
preparatory to a building project is equally plainly not” .*” The challenge in this
definitional approach to sculpture is to reconcile it with statutory language that
makes clear that copyright subsists in works of sculpture “whether the work
is of artistic quality or not”. Taken to its logical end, this statutory language
must admit into sculpture three-dimensional matter that is analogous to
engineering drawings - such as the wooden model in !Vham-O or the plaster
shapes in Breville Europe. If such matter were admitted as works of sculpture in
Australian law, as explained in Chapter 10, such sculptural works are unlikely
to avoid the operation of the copyright/ design overlap exception. However,
Mann J's observation in Lucasfilm might provide a useful pathway between
a judicial gloss that places authorial aesthetic aspiration as the essence of
sculpture, and statutory language not requiring any artistic quality. An artist's

hand is required, but if it fails to produce a visually appealing artefact, “that
does not matter” 2%

2.8.1.3 Drawings

While copyright in drawings per se was first expressly conferred in the 1862
Fine Arts Act (which also conferred like copyright in paintings and photo-
graphs) substantive protection for drawings existed since a 1735 Act provided
to engravers and etchers a reproductive copyright term. As the famous
case of Prince Albert v Strange demonstrated (in the setting of confidence and
common law copyright) subject matter transferred to such plates was often
drawings.” Section 2 of the 1735 Act provided that: “it shall and may be lawful
for any person or persons, who shall hereafter purchase any plate or plates for
printing, from the original proprietors thereof, to print and reprint from the
said plates”. Technology of the era meant that it was typically from engraved
or etched plates that mass reproduction of drawings and maps could be done.
As litigation in the decades that followed made plain, the subject matter of
protection was the visual representation effected in print by the engraved or
etched plate and not the plate per se%® Copyright in drawings and maps could
be effected by the artist having his or her drawing engraved or etched on a
plate with copyright ownership tied to the chattel ownership of that plate.”
The 1911 Act's definition included “drawing” within the scope of an
artistic work, with the term “drawing” not itself defined in the statute.”
However, within the listed subject matter defined as literary works, “maps,
charts, plans” were included. The Gregory Committee, when reasoning that
copyright ought to subsist in first category artistic works irrespective of artistic
quality — and thereby deliberately made clear that engineering drawings and
the like were to be included - considered that informational visual matter such
as “maps, charts, plans” that had been classified as literary works should be
reclassified as artistic works.” This was achieved by defining “drawing” (now

situated within the first category of artistic work subject matter) to include
“maps, charts, plans” in the 1956 UK Act - a reform accepted by the Spicer
Committee and adopted in the 1968 Act.

Anauthority that deals with the breadth of what informational or instruc-
tional subject matter amounts to a “drawing” in which copyright might subsist
as an artistic work is the Full Federal Court decision in Interlego v Croner
Trading This was decided in 1992 in the shadow of a 1988 Privy Council
Appeal from Hong Kong (where the 1956 UK Act applied) in the counterpart
case of Interlego v Tyco Industries. An issue in each case was whether technical
drawings (ie. “blueprints” or plans) of Lego toy bricks were original artistic
works in view of the circumstance that they were modified drawings, derived
by plaintiff's employees from the plaintiff's earlier technical drawings. Time,
skill and effort had gone into making the modified drawings. However, the
Privy Council first cautioned that:

It by no means follows, however, that that which is an exact and literal
reproduction in two dimensional form of an existing two dimensional work
becomes an original work simply because the process of copying it involves
the application of skill and labour. There must in addition be some element
of material alteration or embellishment which suffices to make the totality
of the work an original work. Of course, even a relatively small alteration
or addition quantitatively may, if material, suffice to convert that which is
substantially copied from an earlier work into an original work. Whether
it does so or not is a question of degree having regard to the quality rather
than the quantity of the addition. But copying, per se, however much skill
or labour may be devoted to the process, cannot make an original work.
A well-executed tracing is the result of much labour and skill but remains
what it is, a tracing.*
Having laid this down, the Privy Council required the matter put forward
as drawn artistic works to feature “visually significant” differences to the
drawings from which they were derived.” In relation to the representative
plaintiff drawing in focus “their Lordships can see no alteration of any visual
significance such as to entitle the drawing, as a drawing, to be described as
original” * Given this position by the Privy Council, its effective rejection by
the Full Federal Court in Interlego v Croner Trading reveals a distinct Australian
approach. Gummow J, writing for the Full Court, stated:
There is no doubt that the test of whether one drawing based on another
attracts a separate copyright is a visual one. The question for the court is
whether the later drawing is merely a copy of the earlier, or is a new artistic

work. The difficulty with the approach of the Privy Council lies in the adop-
tion of a notion of ‘significance’

Gummow J considered that the evidence “made it clear that even in the appar-
ently simple task of removing lines from a drawing, great skill was involved”
and that from a technical perspective the changes were significant.”” In over-
turning the trial judge, who had reached the conclusion that the drawings were
not original works because they were mere copies of earlier drawings, and in
rejecting the Privy Council’s conclusion, the Full Federal Court implicitly made
clear its appreciation that under Australian law a drawing as an artistic work
need not have artistic quality. In particular, technical drawings were informa-
tional visual works and originality may resolve to the author's application of
technical skill. That approach, if carried across to sculpture, would suggest
that authorities such as I Viam-O v Lincoln Industries and Breville Europe v Thorn
EM1 are favoured in Australia and the result in Lucasfilm rejected.

2.8.1.4 Engravings

As noted above, the statutory protection conferred upon engravings and
etchings in the 18th century sprung from a desire to protect the visual
art - e.g. drawings and maps - that could typically be only reproduced by
printing from engraved or etched solid plates.“ By the time of the 1911 Act’s
consolidation “engravings” was a subject-matter type listed in an inclusive
definition of “artistic work”, and separately defined “engravings” to include:
“etchings, lithographs, wood-cuts, prints, and other similar works, not being
photographs”. In the 1956 and 1968 Acts, where a closed definition of artistic
work was introduced, a divergence occurred insofar as the 1956 UK Act carried
forward the substance of the 1911 language, whereas the Australian 1968 Act
introduced a new illustrative sub-type of work, the “product of photogravure”,
so that the modern Australian definition provides that:

engraving includes an etching, lithograph, product of photogravure, wood-

cut, print or similar work, not being a photograph.“
In essence the legacy meaning of this entire category emerged as works first
made by some type of physical artistic impression ona hard surface (e.g. metal,
stone or wood) with a view to that surface being an effective master copy
for flat printed reproduction on paper or some other similar medium.™* With
paintings and drawings being directly protected as artistic works since 1862,
and technological changes, the importance of engravings as standalone subject
matter has retracted in modern law and commerce. To the extent engravings

have been considered in modern law it has been in the setting of dies, moulds
and tools used in the manufacture of mass-produced plastic goods - such as
by injection moulding methods. Thus in IVham-O v Lincoln Industries the New
Zealand Court of Appeal, after finding that the wooden model of a Frisbee
shape was a work of sculpture, went on to hold that the metal die moulds
based on that shape and made mechanically in a lathe were “engravings” and
that the resultant plastic Frisbees made from the die were “prints”. This
approach to engraving and prints has been rejected in Australia by Pincus J. In
a case, involving claims in copyright relating to ride-on mower componentry,
Pincus J held:

No consideration of policy, or other orthodox approach, could justify strain-
ing the English language so far as to call the moulds engravings. Despite the
respect which one must have for any decision of the New Zealand Court of
Appeal, I find myself unable to follow the approach in the Lincoln Industries
case. In particular, I cannot, with respect, agree with the view that a frisbee
is an image or that it is a print. Similarly, in my opinion, the moulds from
which these machine parts are made are not engravings.””

The view expressed by Pincus J has not been challenged in Australia on
appeal, and there seems no reason in copyright policy or history to question
its correctness. Moreover, the operation of the copyright/design overlap
exception renders many of these considerations moot. As will be explained
the engravings most likely to be actionable in copyright in Australia are those
which have value as the master for flat prints or those which are also works
of artistic craftsmanship.

2.8.1.5 Photographs

The UK 1862 Fine Arts Act first extended copyright protection to photographs,
as it did for drawings and paintings without much discrimination between
the three varieties of visual art. Therefore the inclusion of photographs as
artistic works in the 1911 UK Act was not new ground. However the 1908
Berne revision, which informed much of the 1911 UK Act, provided latitude
for term duration in respect of photographic works. This arose because
unlike the UK, other countries (“notably Germany”) treated photography in
their copyright laws as a lesser form compared to other artistic works. In
this context the Gorell Committee report also included concerns expressed
about difficulty in determining the identity of the author of a photograph

and together this led to a recommended more modest term duration of 50
years from publication for photographs as opposed to all other works. The
Committee recommended, however, that such term should apply only when
the photograph was taken by its author in the course of employment and when
a photograph was taken by its author personally on his or her own account, the
term should be the standard term for an artistic work; life of the author and 50
years.” Neither recommendation was adopted. Instead the 1911 Act included
a provision which for a photographic work defined an even more abbreviated
term, attached to a deemed authorship rule: “fifty years from the making of the
original negative from which the photograph was ... derived, and the person
who was owner of such negative at the time when such negative was made
shall be deemed to be the author of the work”.

In the 1956 UK Act the copyright term for a photograph became 50
years from first publication; however, its author remained deemed to be the
“owner of the material on which [the photograph] is taken”. The 1968 Act
on enactment carried forward the special term rule from the 1956 UK Act
(until its abolition on 1 January 2005**) but not the deemed authorship rule.
This was consistent with the recommendation of the Spicer Committee who,
by majority, was “of the view that the definition of ‘author’ in relation to a
photograph should be ‘the person who takes the photograph’”.* It was and
remains the only definition of who is an author in the 1968 Act. In the 1988
UK Act the deemed authorship provision tied to chattel ownership was not
carried forward, so that photographs were subject to the new general rule: an
author in relation to a work means the person who creates it.”” This seems to
have largely harmonised UK and Australian law on point of authorship of
photographs. In Creation Records v News Group a striking assembly of objects
(such as a car and furniture) and musical band members were arranged in
and around an outdoor swimming pool for a record album photo shoot by a
Mr Michael Spencer Jones.” A newspaper journalist without authorisation
from the band or Mr Jones photographed the set, and the plaintiffs sought
to restrain exploitation of that unauthorised photograph. Lloyd J of the UK
High Court had no difficulty in concluding the subject of the photo shoot was
distinct from the artistic works that were the resulting photographs of it by
Mr Jones:

Next, [plaintiff’s counsel] contended that [the journalist's] photograph was
itself a copy of the official photograph taken by Mr Jones, regardless of the

order in which the two were taken. I do not see how that can be argued. If
the subject matter is not itself copyright, in principle two different photog-
raphers can take separate photographs of the same subject without either
copying the other. Of course copyright subsists in the official photograph
and if it were the only source of the scene it would be an infringement to
copy that, either by a direct copying process or by the scene being recreated
and a fresh photograph taken of that recreation. But it is a basic proposition
of copyright law that two works created from a common source do not by
reason of that fact involve copying one of the other, however similar they
are?

This statement of principle, coupled with the statutory guidance, locates the
originality of a photograph in its taking. Any appropriation must derive from
the artefact that is the author’s photograph for an alleged infringement to be
actionable. In Creation Records this derivation element was plainly absent.

The originality of a photograph may be as thin as an authorial “point and
shoot”. (As explained in Chapter 5 a substantial part taking of a work sustained
by thin originality might require quite an exact and complete taking.) The
definition of what is a photograph has not changed since enactment in 1968,
so that a photograph is defined to mean in modern Australian law:

a product of photography or of a process similar to photography, other than
an article or thing in which visual images forming part of a cinematograph
film have been embodied, and includes a product of xerography, and
photographic has a corresponding meaning.

The cinematograph film exclusion is discussed in Chapter 4." The outer
boundaries of how thin the originality may be to sustain photographic work
copyright under Australian law has not been tested. Clearly any digital still
image consciously taken by a human author using an analogue or digital device
should prima facie comprise an original photographic work — even a “selfie”
taken ina second. However, is a photocopy a photograph? The express inclu-
sion of “a product of xerography” neither features in UK legislation nor was
it a recommendation of the Spicer Committee. As a “product of xerography”
the definition seems to include a mere photocopy, but whether that was truly
intended is obscure and even if so, the inclusion of a mundane photocopy as
a photographic artistic work would find little policy justification. As observed
by an English textbook:

Originality presupposes the exercise of substantial independence, skill,
labour, judgment and so forth. For this reason it is submitted that a person
who makes a photograph merely by placing a drawing or painting on the
glass of a photocopying machine and pressing the button gets no copyright
at all.

It is likely that copyright will not subsist in certain photographs because the

originality responsible for their existence is de minimis. This proposition finds

some support in Australian authorities - albeit none directly on photogra-
phy.** Images made by use of flat-bed scanners or captures from the screens
of smartphones might be regarded the same way. Indeed a US decision,

Bridgeman Art Library v Correll Corporation, went so far as to find that the Privy

Council's decision in Interlego v Tyco Industries meant that under the 1988 UK

Act there was no originality in a purely representational photograph of a two-

dimensional object - such as a photograph or a painting.**

Bridgeman Art Library v Correll Corporation needs to be regarded with
considerable caution in Australia for several reasons. First, it is clear enough
that the Privy Council decision in Interlego v Tyco Industries does not represent
the Australian law on originality in artistic works.*° Second, the Full Federal
Court in its counterpart Interlego decision made amply clear that technical
skill alone - absent any artistic quality - ought to sustain the originality of an
artistic work such as a photograph.*” Third, in Antiquesportfolio v Rodney Fitch
& Co Neuberger J cast doubt over that US court's application of modern UK
law: “it may well be that, if the photographer in such a case could show that
he had in fact used some degree of skill and care in taking the photograph, he
could claim originality in ... such a photograph” ** In any event, Neuberger J
in Antiquesportfolio v Rodney Fitch & Co had no difficulty in finding originality
in the catalogue photographs of three-dimensional objects - antiques - that
were before the court. The following were identified as counting towards that
originality: (i) positioning of the object; (ii) angle at which the photograph
is taken; and (iii) lighting and the focus. These were choices made to exhibit
particular qualities including colours, features and details.”

2.8.2 The second (b) category: architecture

Prior to 1911 works of architecture were protected in a limited way. It was
accepted that architect plans might comprise drawings under the 1862 Fine
Arts Copyright Act, but this meant no more than they could “not be copied

on paper” without the relevant author’s permission. That is, under the Fine
Arts Copyright Act an architect's plan could not be infringed by a building. The
1908 Berne revision obliged Berne Union members to protect the rights of the
authors of works of “architecture” and the Gorrell Committee appreciated
that this meant protection to actual built forms." However there was obvious
concern about this extension of copyright, and the Committee understood that
the Berne objective was to “protect works of original and artistic character, and
not works of common type which have been frequently produced on previous
occasions” ” This was reflected in the 1911 Act which included “architectural
works of art” as a type of work within the definition of artistic work, and
defined that type to mean “any building or structure having an artistic char-
acter or design, in respect of such character or design, or any model for such
building or structure, provided that the protection afforded by this Act shall be
confined to the artistic character and design, and shall not extend to processes
or methods of construction”.

At the same time protection of architecture plans remained capable of
protection as drawings - a separate type of artistic work. Moreover, the
limitation that existed under the Fine Arts Copyright Act - which precluded
infringement in some form different from the painting, drawing or photograph
of the plaintiff - was removed insofar as the notion of copyright under the 1911
Act was expressed to be “the sole right to produce or reproduce the work or any
substantial part thereof in any material form whatsoever” 2# This was inter-
preted in a 1936 case involving the building design of a shopfront to encompass
the possibility that an architect’s plan could be infringed by a defendant's build-
ing.** In both the 1956 and 1968 Acts transformative reproduction was further
codified for artistic works. Reproduction was expressly deemed to include for
a two-dimensional work a version in a three-dimensional form and for a three-
dimensional work a version in a two-dimensional form. At the same time
“a building or a model of a building” were made their own second category
of artistic work. As noted above a Spicer Committee recommendation
was enacted so that, like first category of artistic works, in the 1968 Act
this second category is also protected whether or not of artistic quality.”

In both the 1956 and 1968 Acts a “building” was defined to include “a struc-
ture of any kind”. The Queensland Supreme Court concluded in 1980 that an
abbreviated tennis court was a “building”. It identified this building to be: “a
concrete slab with special markings upon it ... and with net posts set in the slab
at selected positions”. The court did not consider, however, that “the building
in question includes the net, for the height of the net may vary, depending upon
its tensioning”. In 1994, the Northern Territory Supreme Court found that a
prefabricated fibreglass swimming pool (constructed offsite and intended for
in-ground installation) also was a “building” under this definition, and that the
plug and mould used in its manufacture were each a “model of a building”

The upshot of this is that architecture (which under the Australian
approach to date has included an array of built forms) had passed from having
limited protection prior to 1911, to effectively dual artistic work protection in
both buildings per se (i.e. second (b) category) and their underlying plans as
drawings - ie. the first (a) category. Thus, in many cases after 1911 whenever
the plaintiff was the author (or owner) of both copyright in the architectural
plans and the resulting building, both the drawn artistic work and the built
artistic work could comprise the basis of action. In modern Australian litiga-
tion commonly the architectural works in question are the designs of project
homes, and in those cases, it is the architectural plans (i.e. drawings in the (a)
category of the artistic work definition) that emerge as the predominate artistic
work relied upon by Australian plaintiffs.~°

2.8.3 The third (c) category: artistic craftsmanship

The emergence of works of artistic craftsmanship in 1911, as explained above
(see: 28), was tied to a socio-political movement in England, rather than Berne
norms. Most obviously such works comprise artefacts such as furniture pieces,
jewellery and items of apparel that an author has designed and made with
aesthetic considerations at front of mind. The use of machinery or comput-
ing technology as a tool does not preclude authorship of a work of artistic
craftsmanship 2 For reasons that will be explained in Chapter 10 in the context
of the copyright/design overlap exception, the work of artistic craftsmanship
has emerged as a critical type of artistic work in Australia in cases involving the

industrial production of articles of three-dimensional design based on artistic
works.** In short, the breadth of the copyright exception in such cases means
that in the absence of a valid design registration a plaintiff will typically only
have a right of action if it can establish the underlying artistic work is a work
of artistic craftsmanship. Having not sought registered design protection,
and put the design in the prior art base by its industrial application, within the
contours of the copyright/design exception a plaintiff's copyright claim can
usually only survive if the plaintiff can establish that it owns copyright in a
work of artistic craftsmanship that the three-dimensional design derives from.

It was indeed in this very setting in 2007 that the Burge v Swarbrick High
Court unanimously provided guidance on the legal criteria that needed to
be satisfied for someone to author a work of artistic craftsmanship.* In so
doing, reliance was placed upon Lord Simon’s opinion in George Hensher v
Restawile Upholstery. In George Hensher the plaintiff had made a new furniture
suite range, branded the BRONX, by modifying an existing suite, branded the
DENVER, by replacing the legs with a wooden plinth.** It was an update to
give the new furniture range “a more attractive lighter floating appearance” .»”
Lord Simon stated:

A work of craftsmanship, even though it cannot be confined to handicraft,
at least presupposes special training, skill and knowledge for its production
... ‘Craftsmanship’, particularly when considered in its historical context,
implies a manifestation of pride in sound workmanship ~ a rejection of the
shoddy, the meretricious, the facile. But the craftsmanship - not the work
itself — must, in addition, be artistic.
Conceiving the expression “work of artistic craftsmanship” as a composite
expression, and thus one that ought not be interpreted by separating out its
elements, the relevant question as put by Lord Simon was: “is this the work
of one who was ... an artist-craftsman?”, a test which resembles that accepted
by Laddie J in Metix for sculpture: “a three-dimensional work made by an
artist's hand”.”° The House of Lords in George Hensher unanimously found
that the artefacts put forward were not such works, although the reasoning
that led to that conclusion was terse. Lord Simon held that the new suites
were “perfectly ordinary pieces of furniture” and that it “would be an entire
misuse of language to describe them or their prototypes as works of artistic
craftsmanship” 7” In contrast was the much clearer rejection of the William Hill
fixed odds betting coupon as a work of artistic craftsmanship 14 years earlier: it
was said by Denning MR to have “no more appeal to the aesthetic sense than a

set of logarithm tables or an income tax return, which are more apt to produce
a feeling of revulsion than a sense of beauty”?

In Burge v Swarbrick the High Court had before it an argument that the
plug and moulds used sequentially as steps in the manufacture of the hull
and deck of a 30-foot fibreglass racing yacht were works of artistic craftsman-
ship. The yacht design was that of Mr John Swarbrick. In overturning the
lower courts, the unanimous bench adopted much of Lord Simon’s overall
approach in George Hensher but ultimately offered a clearer application of
principle. It held that a determination as to whether or not something is a
work of artistic craftsmanship “turns on assessing the extent to which the
particular work's artistic expression, in its form, is unconstrained by functional
considerations” .** Manifestly, and unlike all other artistic works, the particular
artistic qualities of the artefact put forward as the work of the author matter
here. In applying Lord Simon’s composite test to the artefacts before it, the
High Court held that neither the plug nor the related mouldings were works
of artistic craftsmanship because the work of Mr Swarbrick in designing their
form “was not that of an artist-craftsman’”.** The objective evidence pointed
to his skill and craft being essentially directed to functional issues of speed
and water dynamics.”

Importantly, the High Court stressed that this conclusion applied to the
plug and the mouldings insofar as they were manifestations of the same
functional aims.*® The status of the plug or mouldings as manufacturing
intermediates was not a controlling consideration. In this the High Court
implicitly criticised the Full Federal Court's position which doubted the plug
was a work of artistic craftsmanship on the basis that it was no more than the
means to the end. Rather, the High Court endorsed Lord Reid’s statement
in George Hensher that suggested the prototype of the BRONX (although a
knock-up to establish the look of the article) would have amounted to the
first reduction to a material form of the work had there been a work of artistic
craftsmanship, and the prototype would have sustained copyright. The High
Court regarded the plug in exactly the same way.

Also important is that the High Court in Burge v Swarbrick noted as a “read-
ily apparent proposition” that the “craftworks depicting Territorian animals,
reptiles and insects” in I Vildash v Klein could comprise both sculptures and

works of artist craftmanship given the absence of mutual exclusivity between
the third category of artistic work and the other two categories.” In Vildash
itself Angel J found that the handicraft works in issue (made by Ms Wildash
from wire, beads, glass and crystal) demonstrated requisite artistic quality and
were the product of requisite craftsmanship: “[e]ach is made by hand and has
artistic character that is likely to be valued or appreciated by its owner.”
The fact that some of those works had functionality, such as being holders for
candles or mozzie coils clearly did not preclude this outcome under the High
Court's approach insofar as those functional considerations did not dictate
many of the three-dimensional visual features of those artefacts.

The discussion on works of artistic craftsmanship can be concluded by
highlighting the impact of Burge  Swarbrick in State of Escape Accessories 0
Schwartz, a first instance decision involving a perforated neoprene tote bag
(the Escape Bag). The Escape Bag was constructed by the use of sailing rope
as handles, with the rope also running down the exterior of the front and
back, under the base and passing through the body of the bag. Additional
sailing rope was fixed around the base gussets of the bag (akin to the use of
piping) to protect its corners and maintain its shape. The manifest aspiration
of its designer, Ms Brigitte MacGowan, was to create a casual fashion item that
integrated form and function” Davies J, in applying Burge v Swarbrick, found
the bag not to be a work of artistic craftsmanship. Davies J held that:

Ms MacGowan did not approach the design and manufacture of the Escape
Bag as an artist-craftsperson. She had no special training, skill and knowl-
edge relating to the design and manufacture of handbags and many of the
issues she encountered were purely functional in nature - for example,
preventing the raw edges of neoprene from fraying."

On the Escape Bag as an artefact Davies J accepted that the choice of the perfo-

rated neoprene as the fabric “was unconstrained by the function and utility

of the Escape Bag and I accept that the selection of that fabric was governed
by considerations of appearance and aesthetics” .”? However, from that point
all other three-dimensional features of shape of the bag were found to resolve
functional issues. For example, Davies J noted that Ms MacGowan’s evidence
was that sailing rope is “hard wearing and non-stretch” and these properties
enabled her to use it to “create a framework that when sewn around the entire
girth of the bag allowed [her] to carry heavy loads without compromising the
fabric” 7° Given the nature of the artefact posited (a casual yet fashionable

woman’s carry bag) the conclusion that it lacks artistry is tendentious.”#
MacGowan’s Escape Bag is a far cry from Swarbrick’s plug and arguably closer
to Wildash’s holders for candles or mozzie coils, especially in view of the court
holding that its predominate aspect, the perforated neoprene, was the product
of aesthetic choice. If upheld on any final appeal (a notice of appeal was filed
in early 2021) the holding will represent a constriction of what will qualify
as a work of artistic craftsmanship, and will oblige industry actors who are
in positions analogous to State of Escape Accessories to consider even more
carefully registered design protection.

2.9 Works of joint authorship

Given the centrality of authorship, copyright law has to provide a variety of
rules to cater for settings in which there are two or more authors of a work.”
Where it is accepted there are a plurality of authors, such a work is specifically
defined in copyright law as a work of joint authorship, and there is an evolving
body of law around when such a work will be recognised and who its authors
are. Issues around characterisation as a work of joint authorship give rise to
questions about the source and nature of the originality that sustains the work,
which is crucial to determining the identity of the work itself. So that in Career
Step v Talentmed Robertson J accepted that a determination on the issue of
joint authorship went to the very identification of the work in issue. In that
case, the plaintiff claimed the literary work was a set of course materials for
which a large plurality of diverse experts were responsible as joint authors;
the defendants argued that each module within the set was its own work, with
its sole author or a smaller more focused team of authors. In finding for the
plaintiff the trial judge held:
In my opinion, the [defendants’] contentions stand or fall by reference to
whether or not the work in suit ... is a single work or whether each of the
modules is a single work. In my view, the work in suit is a single work
notwithstanding that one writer or author did not contribute to every
module of that work and in most instances there was not a single writer
for each module”

Aside from the law around this characterisation of whether or not a work
is one of joint authorship which will be considered further here, there are
four main areas in which copyright law caters for works of joint authorship
with specific rules. These are: those relating to initial ownership of copyright
in the work considered in Chapter 4 (see: 4.6); issues of term duration also
considered in Chapter 4 (4.8.4); jurisdictional connection considered in

Chapter 13 (see: 13.2.2) and the accommodation of the interests of joint authors
within the moral rights regime considered in Chapter 12 (see: 12.2.1).

2.9.1 The requirement of collaboration

Judicial consideration in Levy v Rutley of pre-1911 copyright law recognised
the possibility that if a work is written by two people “in prosecution of a
preconcerted joint design” the two might be said to be co-authors of the whole,
notwithstanding that different portions were respectively the sole productions
of either.” The 1911 Act introduced a codifying definition of a work of joint
authorship primarily to support a rule dealing with term duration where there
are multiple authors.” The essence of the 1911 definition remains as modern
law in the UK and Australia. The Australian definition provides that a work of
joint authorship means “a work that has been produced by the collaboration
of two or more authors and in which the contribution of one author is not
separate from the contribution of the other author or the contributions of the
other author or authors”. In Beckingham v Hodgens Floyd J (who was consider-
ing similar text to the Australian definition in its native provision: Copyright
Act 1956 (UK), s 11(3)) supported by the UK Court of Appeal, restated Levy
2 Rutley as requiring that for someone to be a joint author the “parties must
have a common design to produce the work” and he or she must “reach the
threshold of a significant and original contribution in furtherance of that
common design”.*** However, both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal
rejected that a work of joint authorship required that the parties intended to
be joint authors.” In Beckingham v Hodgens the plaintiff's contribution of four
bars, repeated three times, to the musical work of a popular song was sufficient
in the circumstances to confer upon him the status of joint author. The earlier
UK trial decision of Park J in Hadley v Kemp involved members of the 1980s
pop group Spandau Ballet. It made clear that, in the case of musical works,
the nature of the contribution must be that of expressive composition, not
merely matters of musical performance style.” This was the key basis upon
which the defendant, Kemp, was able to successfully assert his status of sole
author against claims of joint authorship made by the plaintiffs who were other
members of the pop group.

A number of modern Australian decisions bear on the question of collabo-
ration. The starting point is the statement in the Gummow-led opinion in IceTV:

“Where a literary work is brought into such existence by the efforts of more
than one individual, it will be a question of fact and degree which one or more
of them have expended sufficient effort of a literary nature to be considered an
author of that work within the meaning of the [Copyright] Act.” In Dynamic
Supplies v Tonnex Yates J at trial found that subsequent revisions to a literary
work undertaken by others “was really separate” from the authorship of it;
these revisions were each employee's “own separate work”.*° As such, the
work in question was found not to be a work of joint authorship. In Primary
Health Care Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation Stone J held that a patient's
medical records were not works of joint authorship because the health care
professionals making each entry in the records was separate and distinct and
not the result of requisite collaboration. The trial judge observed that central to
the concept of joint authorship is “that the product of the collaboration between
the authors is a joint work, not one in which the individual contributions are
separate”.”*° Moreover, the nature of that contribution must be both significant
and authorial so that in University of Sydney v ObjectiVision, Burley J could not
be satisfied, for an asserted cohort of nine joint authors of a computer program
known as OPERA v2.3, whether three of those nine had made a sufficient
contribution (in terms of “nature, quantity and form’) to the creation of the
work in order to be recognised as an author of it.?*”

In Acolis v Ucorp the issue of collaboration was considered in the setting
of computer-generated matter. As will be recalled the plaintiff's programmers
had written a program (Infosafe) as part of a system which, when certain data
was subsequently entered by third parties, produced source code in HTML
script for the generation of material safety data sheets (MSDS).** Ultimately,
that source code was found to be computer-generated and non-authorial. The
trial judge, Jessup J, had rejected joint authorship between the programmers
and those entering, specific data into the system:

The programmers wrote the program which caused the Infosafe system
to operate as it did: to generate source code in response to defined inputs
by those using the system. They also wrote so much of the source code as
caused particular layouts, and appearance attributes, to appear on the user’s
screen. However, the essence of their contribution was not the writing of the
source code for a particular MSDS. Having written the program by reference
to which source code would, under certain conditions, be generated, they
had no further contribution ... In no realistic sense did the programmers
collaborate with every author and transcriber whose efforts directly led to
the creation or transcription of an MSDS.””

This was upheld by the Full Court because it could not be said that the
programmers, and those who subsequently entered data into the system to

trigger the production of the source code, collaborated with each other in
writing the relevant source code. As Jessup J at trial had explained there
could not be a work of joint authorship where the respective contributions of
the programmers and those entering specific data were separated “along the
axes of communication, time, expertise and content” 2"

In Sanofi-Aventis v Apotex Jagot J had before her a pharmaceutical
company’s product information sheet prepared for regulatory purposes
and created between a team of research employees and a team of regulatory
employees within a pharmaceutical company. Was it a work of joint author-
ship? The trial judge had no doubt that it was:

Nor can it be said that the preparation of the product information documents
involved the kind of separate and individual contributions that led to the
conclusion that the alleged works in Primary Health Care and Acohs were
not works of joint authorship. The members of the Arava Cross-Functional
Team and the global labelling team may well have made suggestions as indi-
viduals about various aspects of the product information documents. But it
cannot be said that the documents are the result of individual and separate
efforts rather than collaboration as required by the definition of ‘work of joint
authorship’. The works in question are the result of a collaborative effort.

The issue of any requirement to precisely identify the various authors in such
a case is considered below.*?

2.9.2 An authorial contribution

‘As was explained above, in the UK case of Hadley » Kemp, Park J had held that
a contribution to composition not performance mattered in determining who
is (or is not) a joint author of a musical work: the contribution must be of the
right kind * Much of the modern Australian consideration of the issue of joint
authorship commences with the Gummow-led opinion in IceTV. As explained
earlier, the literary work in question was a five-columned weekly schedule of
television programs. An issue was whether the work could be considered a
work of joint authorship between an unknown administrative employee who
had prepared it in its compiled and arranged form, and the known program-
ming executives who had made the evaluative choices that the schedule
substantively represented. While the trial judge had rejected those evaluative
choices as irrelevant to the work's originality as “antecedent” or “prepara-
tory”, the Full Federal Court disagreed stating that “there appears to be no
cogent reason why [the plaintiff broadcaster's] creative work in constructing
the program listings should be ignored on the question of originality” *° The

Gummow-led opinion, in essentially reinstating the view of the trial judge, took
what could be regarded as a rigid view to this issue by approaching it through
joint authorship. The opinion held that the administrative employee was the
relevant author of the five-columned weekly schedule. Because that person was
unknown, it followed “that no finding could be made as to whether the Weekly
Schedule was a work of joint authorship” ** This rigidity was consistent with
IceTV representing a shift away from concern about protecting the underlying
investment to produce works, and towards a narrower focus on the particular
form of expression of the work in issue. That expression had to originate from
the independent intellectual effort of an author or of joint authors. Background
individuals whose contributions are remote from the expressive form of the
work, were not likely to readily earn the mantle of author under this approach.
In Telstra Corporation v Phone Directories Company, the direction signalled
in IceTV was followed. The plaintiff argued that various individual employees
working in different capacities collaborated to collect and verify the compila-
tion that was ultimately data processed to comprise its telephone directories.
As such, the plaintiff argued that the directories were works of joint authorship.
This was rejected at trial and by the Full Federal Court where Keane CJ held:
The contributions of individuals discussed in her Honour’s findings may
have been precursors to the compilation of the directories but they were not
part of the actual compilation. Moreover, the work of these individuals was
not collaborative. It was, no doubt, organised to facilitate the production
of the directories but this organisation was not collaboration of the kind
contemplated by the definition of joint authorship, and the contribution
of each of the groups of individuals referred to earlier was made quite
separately 2”
Having removed any possibility of characterisation as a work of joint author-
ship, the plaintiff's case failed for the fundamental reason that the particular
form of expression of the directories as literary work was computer-generated.*
In Fairfax Media Publications v Reed International Books Australia, whether
or not newspaper articles could be characterised as works of joint authorship
was critical to the resolution of the litigation. As summarised by Bennett J, the
plaintiff's submission was: “(a) a journalist writes the article; (b) a sub-editor
edits the article; (c) that makes the journalist and sub-editor joint authors;
(d) the sub-editor writes the headline, which is often derived from the article;
(e) therefore, the article/headline combination is a discrete work, with the
editor and journalist as joint authors” *° This submission was rejected:
The evidence suggests that article writing is a process distinct from headline
writing ... An article with its headline is not a work of joint authorship

because the contribution of each author is separate from the contributions
of the other author ... The fact that sub-editors edit articles as well as write

headlines does not establish that the contribution of journalist and sub-
editor are inseparable or overcome the conclusion that the writing of the
headline is a separate exercise from the writing of the article.°”

In the course of her analysis, Bennett J drew upon the statement quoted above
from the Gummow-led opinion in IceTV.*" That statement, supporting the
rejection of the programming executives in IceTV from the rank of author, sheds
light on the refusal in Fairfax v Reed to characterise the article in toto as a work
of joint authorship on the basis put by the plaintiff which set out the respective
roles in a newspaper article that a sub-editor and a journalist each had.

However, in McCausland o Surfing Hardzoare International Holdings, Slattery J
of the New South Wales Supreme Court accepted that joint authorship arose
in the blueprint drawing of a surfboard fin between the plaintiff, who was
a creative and driven surfboard designer, and a hydrodynamic expert, who
was a qualified naval architect involved in yacht design. The latter undertook
the actual CAD drafting, whereas the former provided drafting suggestions
often through hand-drawn versions.* This was sufficient for the plaintiff to
be found to be joint author with the technical expert in the authorship of the
artistic work: “[the plaintiff's] intellectual effort based on his judgment, skill
and experience were added to the work, but in ways that were blended with
[the technical expert's] contribution” 2°

Ina different setting, Coles v Dormer, the plaintiff had acquired (by assign-
ment from the architect) copyright in his house's architectural plans, being an
artistic work 2% Those plans themselves that had been based upon a “rough
ideas” email - a literary work - that had been in effect the architect’s commis-
sioning brief by the first owner of the house.*® These ideas were quite detailed
“for the work of a lay person” but “far short of the detailed plans required to
build a house” ** That first owner of the house then provided iterative feed-
back to the architect as the drawn plans were formulated. A question before
the court was whether the plans were a work of joint authorship between the
architect and the commissioning client (the first house owner) or a work of
sole authorship by the architect alone. Having considered the guidance from
the Gummow-led opinion from IceTV, Henry J of the Queensland Supreme
Court discounted the contribution made by the first owner's “rough ideas”
email as not being sufficiently connected to the particular form of expression
of the architect's plans.»” The trial judge then found that the later feedback by
the commissioning client (first house owner) were also insufficient to amount
to joint authorship. Those later contributions:

being the wishes, perhaps even instructions, of [the commissioning client]
influenced the ultimate content of the plans produced by [the architect].
However [the commissioning client] did not collaborate in the actual
authorship of the work being produced. Nor as a matter of degree were
[the commissioning client's] efforts sufficient for him to be considered an
author of the work.**

Coming through this reasoning is that when a lay person seeks out a profes-
sional to produce a document - whether it be a plan or a legal document or a
medical opinion - while the client might provide feedback, that is likely to be
too remote from the authorial activity which calls for special skill. As matters
of both principle and accountability, this seems correct.

Australian law after IceTV on the nature of authorship sustaining a work
can be contrasted with the 2019 UK Court of Appeal decision in Kogan v Martin.
The trial judge had rejected Ms Julia Kogan’s claim to be joint author of the
screenplay of the major motion picture Florence Foster Jenkins. On Hacon J's
findings Mr Nicholas Martin was its sole author. Kogan was found to have
merely made proofreading corrections and had offered him three plot ideas,
but in all cases it was Martin who had total control over the form and substance
of the expression of the screenplay:

In my judgment the textual and non-textual contributions made by
Ms Kogan never rose above the level of providing useful jargon, along with
helpful criticism and some minor plot suggestions. Taken together they
were not sufficient to qualify Ms Kogan as a joint author of the Screenplay,
even had those contributions all been made in the course of a collaboration
to create the Screenplay. Mr Martin was the sole author”

This holding would have appeared as completely orthodox had it been arrived
at in Australia by a trial judge under the authority of IceTV. It makes its unani-
mous reversal by the UK Court of Appeal a signal that UK and Australian law
may have diverged.” Floyd L] writing for the Court (or more accurately giving
“the judgment of the court to which all its members have contributed”*") held:

We do not think that it is possible to dismiss any of [Kogan’s] contributions
as not being authorial in nature. It also seems likely that, in rejecting some
of Ms Kogan’s contributions as “minor plot suggestions” the judge had in
mind his high bar for contributions ... It may also be because he considered
that they fell on the wrong side of the ideas/ expression dichotomy to which
he also referred ... If the parties were collaborating, however, these were
not suggestions of “mere ideas”, but contributions to building the situation
depicted in the scene, intimately tied into the development of the plot

As such the UK Court of Appeal found that “Ms Kogan’s contribution was
indeed made as part of a collaboration and passed the quantitative threshold

for joint authorship” The Court of Appeal decision in Kogan v Martin
(as opposed to Hacon J's trial judgment) must be treated with great care in
Australia as it appears to be not consistent with the trend of Australian case
law since IceTV.

2.9.3 Identification of authors

The final issue that has arisen in the modern Australian jurisprudence has been
the extent of the requirement - if any - to specifically identify the authors to
have actionable copyright. This issue typically arises in employment settings
where the works of employee authors, seemingly nameless and faceless to their
plaintiff employer, are relied upon in litigation. As noted above in IceTV the
Gummow-led opinion rejected the possibility of joint authorship in circum-
stances where the identity of the drafter of the five-columned weekly schedule
was not known.*# In Telstra v Phone Directories Gordon J at trial stated that:
“Tf an author or authors (within the meaning of the Copyright Act) cannot
be identified at all, in contradistinction to a situation where the author's or
authors’ exact identity cannot be identified, copyright cannot subsist”.* On
appeal, Yates J clarified this point as follows:

The necessity for there to be an original work carries with it the necessity
for there to be an author or authors but all that needs to be demonstrated
is that such persons exist. Their identification is not legally required by the
concept of an original work.

Relying upon this statement, Jagot J in Sanofi-Aventis v Apotex (where the liter-
ary work was the product of collaboration between two teams of employees)
held that “it is not the case that each and every author must be individually
identified for there to be a work of joint authorship” *” Therefore, it seems that
while proof as to the existence of joint authorship is required, proof as to the
precise identity of those joint authors is not required. However, the Gummow-
led opinion in IceTV offers this sage advice to prospective copyright plaintiffs:
“[t]o proceed without identifying the work in suit and without informing the
inquiry by identifying the author and the relevant time of making or first
publication, may cause the formulation of the issues presented to the court to
go awry” 38

