3.1 Introduction

The nature of the subject matter protected by Part IV of the 1968 Act is distinct
in several respects from Part III works. This will be seen most vividly in the
context of exclusive rights. Indeed, in dealing with subject matter delineation
and identity for Part IV subject matter, it is necessary to deal in this chapter
with matters which straddle the copyright law distinction between subject
matter “nouns” and exclusive right “verbs”. Fundamentally, Part IV subject
matter consists of non-authorial productions made in industries connected to
the literary, dramatic, musical or artistic domains. The basic policy justification
is that such industries support authorship, and as such they should receive
some form of direct conferral of copyright in their productions to protect and
encourage investment. As such, Part IV copyright is a producers copyright.
Loosely and metaphorically, Part II] works are the wines of copyright created
by vignerons (authors) and Part IV subject matters are the wine bottles of copy-
right put out by wineries (producers). However, as this chapter will explain this
metaphor - while useful as an aid to conceptualising the distinct treatment in
the law between the two - has its limitations. Most obviously the inclusion of
cinematograph films within Part IV blurs the distinction. Critically, and with
one limited qualification, any copyright subsisting by virtue of Part IV “is in
addition to, and independent of, any copyright subsisting by virtue of Part III”.

The four types of Part IV subject matter are: sound recordings; cinemato-
graph films; broadcasts (both television and sound); and published editions of
works. UK and Australian law parted company when the UK in 1988 abolished

a sharp statutory distinction between authorial works and producers’ subject
matter, whereas that distinction has persisted as modern law in Australia
derived entirely from the structure of the 1956 UK Act. Over the course of the
1968 Act regime the effect of court decisions has been to develop Australian
law in unique ways. As a consequence, much modern UK case law has less
relevance to many questions related to audio-visual Part IV subject matter
(sound recordings, films and broadcasts) where quite a distinctive body of
Australian law has emerged.

3.2 Sound recordings

The Anglo-Australian historical origins of this Part IV copyright subject matter
are tied to a political contest between an emerging technology platform and
musical composers. So-called “mechanical” recordings of music had emerged
in the latter part of the 19th century in the form of solid-state music boxes
and by the turn of the 20th century had become items of popular media as
phonograms. Pre-1911 copyright law was asked to consider this technological
revolution in two ways: (i) the copyright rights of the musical composers vis a
vis the rights of phonogram makers; and (ii) the copyright rights of the maker
of a phonogram in the phonogram per se. Most of the law reform attention and
debate focused on (i). As will be explained in Chapter 9 (see: 9.3.1) the solution
to (i) in the 1911 Act was to give the authors of literary, dramatic and musical
works a clear exclusive right to control reproduction in a phonogram, but to
make that right in composers and lyricists subject to a compulsory licence. In
relation to (ii) the Gorell Committee had received evidence that manufactur-
ers of phonograms - who had invested in making the first recording - were
suffering from piracy by other manufacturers.” When creating the statutory
licence in s 19 of the 1911 Act, the English Parliament also created a new species
of copyright: “copyright shall subsist in records, perforated rolls, and other
contrivances by means of which sounds may be mechanically reproduced,
in like manner as if such contrivances were musical works” .? The so-called
“author” of this new type of work was deemed to be the owner of the “original
plate” - meaning the physical media comprising the master copy.* This type
of author is more accurately described as a maker or producer. The protec-
tion is directed more against misappropriation (or unfair competition) of the
investment undertaken. There was limited jurisprudence on this new type of
sound recording subject matter and from those sparse authorities it was clear
enough that the rights of the manufacturer of the recording (such as public
performance rights) existed in parallel with those in any recorded literary,
dramatic or artistic works, and did not cut down the authorial rights.°

Therefore, sound recording protection was the pioneer producers’ copy-
right subject matter, with its belated insertion into the 1911 Act as part of a
regime which both created a statutory licence for sound producers to repro-
duce in a phonogram (i.e. “mechanically”) musical works and any associated
lyrics, and conferred a type of copyright protection in the phonograms per se
“as if such contrivances were musical works” .* It is this conferral of protection
that the Gregory Committee was content to carry forward: “[w]e think that no
one will question the justice of preventing trade competitors from copying a
record made by a gramophone company” .” However, in one important respect
the Gregory Committee modernised the 1911 protection in a way that had
substantive law consequences. It observed that the use of the word “mechani-
cally” might not be apt “when use is being made of such things as magnetic
tape to take the recording” 6 It recommended - and as will be seen the impacts
of this remain in modern Australian law - that in “drafting provisions relating
to records, cinematograph films and such matters ... the wording adopted
should have regard to the end-product (e.g. sound or visual representation)
rather than the means whereby these effects are produced”.’

The Spicer Committee’s consideration of sound recordings, as will be
explained in Chapter 9, dealt more with issues relating to whether the exclu-
sive rights of performance in public and broadcasting to the public should
be attached to the subject matter.’? On matters of subject matter definition, it
appears to have accepted the Gregory Committee’s recommendations. The
1968 Act as first enacted included a definition of sound recording, taken from
the 1956 UK Act, to mean “ the aggregate of the sounds embodied ina record”.
It has not been amended and captured the essence of the Gregory Committee’s
recommendation that the definitional law in this area should focus on the
subject matter ends rather than subject matter means. In the most basic setting,
for example a sound recording of heavy rainfall ona tin roof, the maker of that
sound recording can be either a natural or incorporated legal person.” The
1968 Act deems the making to occur when the “first record embodying the
recording was produced” (i.e. the master copy) and picking up the substance of
the 1911 Act our modern law provides that “the maker of the sound recording
is the person who owned the record at that time”.® The Act defines “record”
to include “a disc, tape, paper, electronic file or other device in which sounds
are embodied”. This definition has remained static since 1968, except for the

addition of “electronic file” in 2006. The intended meaning on enactment in
1968 seems clear enough: whoever owns the physical media (i.e. the chattel
property) on which the master copy is recorded, is the “maker” of the sound
recording, whether a natural or incorporated person. The 2006 addition of
“electronic file” to the inclusive definition of “record” was to seek to achieve
technological neutrality for the purposes of the statutory licence extending to
music downloads.” However in this context, because an “electronic file” is not
obviously a chattel (as opposed to the media or equipment on which the file
is stored) this 2006 reform, when coupled with the “other device” language,
creates some ambiguity in its application in determining who is the maker of
a sound recording in certain cases. The master sound recording, first recorded
by A to acloud-storage device owned by a behemoth entity such as Microsoft
leads to the question is A the maker or is Microsoft the maker, or is it a joint
making? In this setting a purposive interpretation might lead a court to be
predisposed to find in favour of A, but it is an open and contestable question
that might implicate Microsoft's relevant terms of service.’

Regardless, the one thing that is clear from the statutory scheme is that
copyright subsistence in sound recordings (and all species of Part IV subject
matter) requires no authorial originality. To return to the recording of heavy
rainfall on a tin roof: if a recording device is left unattended, in circumstances
in which the recording device is activated by the sound of rainfall to make
recordings, and each record is stored in the hard drive of the device, then
copyright will subsist in any record as a sound recording with the maker being
the human or corporate owner of the device.”” Part IV subject matter can be
made in circumstances which would never amount to the original authorship
of a Part III work.

While issues relating to substantial part and exclusive rights will be
canvassed in following chapters, the identity of what exactly is a sound
recording as copyright subject matter is best illuminated by the “sound
alike” infringement litigation.* As will be seen the approach taken in this
litigation reflects what is the common approach taken to the identity of all
Part IV subject matter. The cardinal exclusive right controlled by the owner
of a sound recording is “to make a copy of the sound recording”, in which in
current law “copy” relevantly means “a record embodying the sound record-
ing” and includes (similar to the material form definition) “any form (whether
visible or not) of storage ... (whether or not the copy of the sound recording
... can be reproduced)”.!° The question that the Federal Court was asked in

the 1987 CBS Records Australia v Telmak Teleproducts litigation was whether
the defendant's deliberate replication in their own sound studios of the sound
of the plaintiff's sound recordings amounted to copying. At both interlocu-
tory stage and at final trial, Bowen CJ offered the view that wherever used in
the 1968 Act a copy “must refer to a copy of the actual sounds embodied in
the original sound recording and not to something produced later by other
performers by way of imitation of the original” .”° As such the defendant could
not infringe. The outcome in the litigation highlights the narrower nature of
copyright in Part IV for all subject matter and which applies in respect of all
exclusive rights. For Part IV what you see or hear is what you get, and there
is no issue of underlying originality to consider. In CBS Records Australia v
Telmak Teleproducts the plaintiff's sound recordings as copyright subject matter
could be no more than the actual sounds recorded by the maker. In Part IV the
maxim introduced in the previous chapter that “copyright protects expression
rather than idea” applies in a more restricted way: protection is confined to
the exact same expression.

3.3 Cinematograph films

As noted in the discussion of dramatic works in the previous chapter, the
Gorell Committee was faced with a new Berne norm inserted at the 1908
Berlin revision: “cinematograph productions shall be protected as literary
or artistic works if, by the arrangement of the acting form or combination of
incidents represented, the author has given the work a personal and original
character” .*1 The Committee considered this new obligation to be reasonable
and ought be adopted “although it introduces new matter into the areas of
protection” .” As was explained in that previous chapter, this protection was
achieved by the inclusion within dramatic works of cinematograph produc-
tions where the “arrangement or acting form or the combination of incidents
represented give the work an original character” - language obviously
informed by Berne itself.”

The squeezing of cinematograph film within the dramatic work category
was an expedient that created uncertainty. Under the 1911 regime a film that
received protection as a dramatic work has as its author “the person who

invents the plot or arranges the incidents” — the deviser of the film’s scenario.”
However all films - understood at the time to be “a series of photographs
projected on a screen in such rapid succession as to give the illusion of
motion”” - also received artistic work protection as a series of photographs.”°
The upshot of this under the 1911 Act was that for dramatic film the term of
copyright of life of the author and 50 years applied, whereas non-dramatic
film - such as newsreel footage - merely the lesser term of copyright that was
associated with photographs of 50 years from making applied.”

The Gregory Committee, in light of the Brussels-revised Berne obligation
to give undifferentiated protection to “cinematographic works and works
produced by a process analogous to cinematography” within the rubric of
“literary and artistic works”, considered “there are substantial advantages in
defining and treating films as films” .”* In arriving at this view, the Committee
considered that: (1) any film soundtrack should be regarded as part of the film
copyright and not as a distinct sound recording; (2) film copyright so conceived
should be regarded as distinct from any musical works reproduced in the
soundtrack, or underlying literary or dramatic works such as screenplays; and
(3) that the entrepreneur responsible for the film’s production arrangements
in toto is the relevant maker.” Thus in the 1956 UK Act, films were consigned
to Part II (the equivalent of Part IV of the 1968 Act) which was consistent with
this last point - their treatment as entrepreneurial productions. The Spicer
Committee implicitly adopted this approach. While it acknowledged that
“having regard to the provisions of the Brussels Convention, cinematography
films could be included among the general provisions governing literary and
artistic works, we think it is appropriate that a particular copyright in cinema-
tography films should be created with its own special term of protection” .° This
meant that notwithstanding the clear inclusion of works of cinematography as
authorial works under Berne, they were regarded as akin to sound recordings
and consigned to be non-authorial productions within Part IV of the 1968 Act.
This swept aside the issue of identifying the author of a cinematographic film,
until as discussed in Chapter 12 (see: 12.2.1), that question arose decades later
for moral rights purposes.

The relevant Australian definition is based on provisions in the 1956 UK
Act and has remained unchanged since enactment in 1968:

cinematograpl. film means the aggregate of the visual images embodied in an
article or thing so as to be capable by the use of that article or thing:

(a) of being shown as a moving picture; or
(b) of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of which
it can be so shown;

and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a sound-track associ-
ated with such visual images.*

This language, taken together with other Part IV provisions, was consistent
with recommendations of the Gregory Committee and represented a definition
that was directed to ends rather than means. However, some physical embodi-
ment is manifestly required by it. The Federal Court has spoken unanimously
in favour of the proposition that a transmission of “live” Olympic sporting
events was not an embodiment “in an article or thing”, so that the content of
the transmission could not be characterised as a cinematograph film:

There was no picture, image or sound recorded or permanently stored in
the copper coaxial cable that transmitted the signal. No picture, image or
sound could be recorded or permanently stored in the ITVR [international
television and radio’] Signal. The ITVR Signal was not tangible and did
not give physical form to an image or sound. There was therefore no fixa-
tion or material embodiment of an aggregation of visual images capable
of being shown as a moving picture and of an aggregation of sounds. No
cinematograph film was made because no first copy was made.

While the ITVR Signal was, simultaneous with transmission, recorded at the
source of transmission by the host broadcaster (and described as a “protec-
tion copy”*’) unlike US law, Australian law has no doctrine of simultaneous
fixation. Under that US doctrine content consisting of sounds or images being
broadcast live is deemed to have been already reduced to a material form
by the broadcaster if a recording of that content is made by the broadcaster
simultaneously with its broadcast.

The making and maker of a film is also defined in the entrepreneurial
manner recommended by the Gregory Committee. Making refers to “the doing
of things necessary for the production of the first copy” and the maker refers to
the person (whether natural or corporate) who has made the arrangements for
such making; the film producer.® There is no provision, as there is with sound
recordings, which treats the owner of chattel property in the master copy of
the film to be the maker.

Australian case law has clarified three important aspects relating to the
identity of cinematograph film as copyright subject matter: (i) the restricted
nature of the property right; (ii) the type of interactive audio-visual media
encompassed by the subject matter; and (iii) the extent to which sounds in a
soundtrack form part of the film itself.

3.3.1 Restricted nature of the property right

Prior to the CBS v Telmak “sound alike” litigation discussed above (see: 3.2), a
similar issue had been considered by the courts in relation to cinematograph
film: could a “copy” of a film occur by a defendant making a similar film? For
this purpose, a copy is defined to mean “any article or thing in which the visual
images or sounds comprising the film are embodied” .* In Universal City Studio
v Zeccola Gray J of the Victorian Supreme Court had held on an interlocutory
basis that an Italian shark attack film, Great White, thematically similar to the
blockbuster Steven Spielberg film Jaws, comprised a copy of the latter. This was
even though no visual image or sounds from Jaws had been literally or techni-
cally incorporated within Great White. The interlocutory injunction was also
supported on the basis of rights owned by the plaintiff in underlying literary
and dramatic works - the Jaws novel and the derivative Jaws screenplay.” On
appeal in the Full Federal Court the injunction against the public exhibition of
Great White was upheld on the basis of the works alone.* For the film copyright
the defendants had argued that “Great White could not be said to constitute
an infringement of any copyright of the respondents in the film Jaws unless

it was an exact or facsimile copy of the film Jaws” .*° While the joint judgment
of Lockhart and Fitzgerald JJ did not express an opinion on that submission,
Jenkinson J was inclined to the view that the defendants’ submission was
correct.*° Jenkinson J’s view of the restricted nature of the relevant property
interest was endorsed more emphatically by Wilcox J in Telmak Teleproducts v
Bond International, an interlocutory decision, in which it was held:

The respondent's film, the subject of this application, was shot and sound
recorded by its own agents. Whatever the script of the film may have owed
to the films of the applicants, the respondent did not make a ‘copy’ of either
of the applicants’ films. ... The respondent did not reproduce the particular
visual images and sounds which together make up the cinematograph films
to which the applicants hold the copyright. It did not cause the applicants’
films, or either of them, to be seen in public, to be broadcast or to be transmit-
ted to subscribers of a diffusion service. It did not deal with the applicants’
films, that is the relevant visual images and sounds, in any way.”

The importance of this statement is in its clear delineation of the limited nature
of cinematograph film as subject matter, and how that nature controls all rights
- not merely the right “to copy” - bundled to it. Notwithstanding this view
it is significant that in a later hearing in the same matter Wilcox J declined
to strike out that aspect of the plaintiffs’ claim alleging infringement of film
copyright without a taking of actual sounds or images on the basis the legal
question was too unsettled to justify a strike-out of the claim.” However, in
the CBS Records Australia v Telmak Teleproducts litigation in the following year
Bowen CJ endorsed the views expressed by Jenkinson J in Zeccola and Wilcox J
in Telmak Teleproducts v Bond International to buttress his own position on
sound recordings.* As will be seen below (see: 3.4) the Full Federal Court has
entrenched this approach further in the context of television broadcasts.“ The
restricted nature of copyright in cinematograph film in the manner described
by Wilcox J in Telmak Teleproducts v Bond International is, like that of the sound
recordings in CBS Records Australia v Telmak Teleproducts, settled law.

3.3.2 Interactive media

In Sega Enterprises v Galaxy Electronics the Federal Court had before it as a test
case the question of whether the interactive video games Virtua Cop and Daytona
USA were cinematograph films, as opposed to the literary work copyright of
their underlying program code. Burchett J at trial found that they were films. In
Burchett J’s opinion a clear expression of principle emerges in addressing the

two primary attacks made on their eligibility. The first attack was that because
the events represented on screen will vary from “screening” to “screening”
dependent upon players’ inputs, it varied too far from the essentially linear
nature of film. This was rejected insofar as that variability was within the
clear parameters of the controlling program, so that the interactive nature did
not disqualify the games as films.* The second attack was more prosaic: film
required a series of still frames and the digital media that the games comprised
lacked this essential element. It will be recalled that the statutory definition
avoids a focus on means as opposed to ends and applying it Burchett J rejected
the “absence of frames” attack in these terms:

But it seems to me that this involves the fallacy of confusing the means with
the ends. A cinematograph film is ‘shown as a moving picture’. That is how
it appears to the viewer. But the means by which the effect is produced
are not the effect, and it may be accepted that the frames involved in the
original technology may not be essential to the production of the effect by
other technologies, such as computer graphics.“

Burchett J’s decision was upheld unanimously by the Full Court.”

However, there appear to be policy limits to how flexible the cinemato-
graph film legal concept can be. In Aristocrat Leisure Industries v Pacific Gaming
Tamberlin J held that the spinning reels of two computerised video poker (or
slot) machine games were not cinematograph films. This was on the basis
that there was on screen no progression or movement sufficiently analogous
to traditional film.* The rejection of the spinning reels as cinematograph film
seems a sound holding on policy grounds and leads to an outcome which
logically excludes such things as a brief animated GIF or a moving screensaver
feature from classification as a cinematograph film (without denying artistic
work protection”) while admitting into the cinematograph film classification
more consequential matter.

3.3.3 Integration of soundtrack

As noted above, the Gregory Committee had recommended that any film
soundtrack should be regarded as part of the film copyright and not as a
distinct sound recording.” The Australian definition sought to achieve this by
including within the cinematograph film definition the aggregate of the sounds
embodied in a soundtrack associated with the visual images, and a separate

provision in s 23(1) deems that soundtrack is not a sound recording. The
legislation also creates an exception in s 110(3) that where “the sounds that are
embodied in a sound-track ... are also embodied in a record ... other than ...
a record derived directly or indirectly from such a sound-track, the copyright
in the cinematograph film is not infringed by any use made of that record” .”
Therefore if a group of famous recording artists provide through their agent
a published sound recording for use in the soundtrack of a film, copyright
exploitation of those artists’ sound recording if derived “other than” from the
film soundtrack can not infringe any film copyright. In Phonographic Performance
Company of Australia v Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations, an
issue not expressly contemplated by the legislative text was considered: would
the copyright exploitation of a film in toto, incorporating the artists’ recording,
comprise an exploitation of the sound recording? A 3 to 2 majority High Court
answered that it would: the cinematograph film definition and the s 23(1)
deeming provision did not speak to pre-existing sound recordings that were
dubbed into a film soundtrack.** The owner of the copyright in such a sound
recording retained actionable rights when the film, with the recording dubbed
into its soundtrack, is exploited notwithstanding s 23(1). It was accepted by
the majority that the legal effect of the cinematograph film definition and the
deeming provision was merely to prevent the maker of a film from acquiring
a separate Part IV copyright as a sound recording in the soundtrack of the film
to the extent it comprised sound that was essentially recorded with the moving
images and not dubbed-in. The majority also observed in passing that s 110(3)
was likely unnecessary in that it simply stated an outcome that would arise
from general copyright principles.*

3.4 Broadcasts (television and sound)

Whereas in the 1911 Act sound recordings were recognised “as if” musical
works and cinematograph films were recognised as artistic works (series of
photographs), dramatic works (if they were of an “original character”) or both,
broadcasts had no recognition. These were, together with published editions
of works (see: 3.5), the totally new copyright subject matter “nouns” of the
1956 UK Act and the 1968 Act. However, the right to control broadcasting as
an exclusive right (i.e. a “verb”) was attached to Berne works and had been
recognised under the Berne Convention since the 1928 Rome revision.® The
conferral of broadcast signal rights in broadcasting organisations was not to

receive international treaty recognition until the 1961 Rome Convention.*
The Rome Convention emerged after both the Gregory Committee and the
Spicer Committee, although the latter noted the 1957 Monaco draft “agree-
ment on the protection of certain rights called neighbouring on copyrights”.°”
The Gregory and Spicer Committees’ recommendations to enact broadcast
copyright occurred absent any treaty obligation to do so.

The Gregory Committee offered two justifications for its initial recommen-
dation: (1) a broadcaster such as the BBC was not “in principle, any different
from a gramophone company or a film company” and therefore should be
afforded parity of protection; and (2) the BBC had represented to the committee
that “indifferent reproductions of both sound and television programmes have
been made, and sold to the public, to the detriment alike of the corporation and
those taking part” .°* The Spicer Committee, observing the 1956 UK enactment
of protection in accordance with the Gregory Committee recommendation,
noted how different intangible and transitory broadcasts were from all prior
subject matter: “the conception of copyright which has hitherto been accepted
is one which extends protection against copying and performing in public any
work insofar as it is reduced to a permanent form”. Moreover, the Spicer
Committee expressed some concern over whether such protection fell within
the copyright head of constitutional power, and as such whether it was better
protected in broadcasting legislation under the broadcast head of power.”
However the Spicer Committee, like the Gregory Committee before it, consid-
ered the protection was justified by good policy: “there can be no doubt that
broadcasting authorities are properly entitled to protection against the pirating
of their broadcasts, whether by re-broadcasting or recording”.

Incurrent Australian law the definitional framework of the subject matter
protected straddles both copyright and broadcasting legislation. Under the
1968 Act copyright directly subsists in a television broadcast or a sound
broadcast made from a place in Australia by a licensee under the Broadcasting
Services Act or by one of the two Australian public broadcasters; the ABC and
the SBS.° With some circularity, a television broadcast is defined in the 1968
Act to mean “visual images broadcast by way of television, together with any
sounds broadcast for reception along with those images” - where the word
“television” is undefined.® Conversely a sound broadcast is defined to mean
“sounds broadcast otherwise than as part of a television broadcast” .* The core

term “broadcast” is defined to mean “a communication to the public delivered
by a ‘broadcasting service’ within the meaning of the Broadcasting Services Act
1992”. In turn, a “broadcasting service” in that 1992 Act means:

a service that delivers television programs or radio programs to persons
having equipment appropriate for receiving that service, whether the
delivery uses the radiofrequency spectrum, cable, optical fibre, satellite or
any other means or a combination of those means, but does not include:

(a) a service (including a teletext service) that provides no more than
data, or no more than text (with or without associated still images);
or

(b) aservice that makes programs available on demand on a point-to-
point basis, including a dial-up service; or

(c) aservice, ora class of services, that the Minister determines ... not
to fall within this definition.

The sole determination made by the relevant Minister under the third exclu-
sionary category was on 12 September 2000, in which the following was also
put outside the bounds of what is a broadcasting service:

a service that makes available television programs or radio programs using

the Internet, other than a service that delivers television programs or radio
programs using the broadcasting services bands.”

In this legislative instrument (which remains current law®) the word “Internet”
is undefined. The broad result of all this can be summarised as follows:

¢ Television and sound broadcasts in which copyright subsists must be
program-based communications to the public made by a “broadcasting
service” as that term is defined in the Broadcasting Services Act.

¢ This may include free-to-air broadcasts made by public and commer-
cial broadcasters (whether analogue or digital) using the spectrum;
subscription broadcasts whether via cable or satellite; and internet
protocol based delivery (IPTV) which is a “multicast via a managed IP
connection technically separate/ distinct from the broadband Internet
connection although carried on the same physical copper lines”.”

¢ Clearly excluded are non-program, data-only services (such as an
online database of journal articles or provision of real-time stock
exchange information), any point-to-point channel (such as private
communication between two networked devices) and any so-called
“over the top” (OTT) internet streaming (such as Netflix) or pod-casting
service which all fall squarely within the 12 September 2000 exclusion.

Phonographic Performance Company of Australia v Commercial Radio Australia in
a test case which involved a radio program that was broadcast by terrestrial
broadcasting and simultaneously internet-streamed via that broadcaster's
website.” The issue was whether there existed one broadcasting service or two
services, one a broadcasting service within the Broadcasting Services Act and the
other an OTT internet streaming service that was outside of the Broadcasting
Services Act. The Full Court held that the delivery of a radio program by trans-
mission from a terrestrial transmitter is a different broadcasting service from
the delivery of the same radio program using the internet. The latter, even
when broadcast simultaneously with a radio broadcast that is delivered via
the broadcasting service bands, was not a “broadcasting service” within the
Broadcasting Services Act by reason of the 12 September 2000 exclusion.”

More generally, it was not until protracted litigation between two national
commercial television broadcasters in the early 21st century, TCN Channel
Nine v Network Ten, that judicial guidance was offered as to the identity of
broadcasts as subject matter. In that litigation ambiguity as to what comprises
a television broadcast as copyright subject matter was an issue which required
resolution by the High Court. In the litigation, however, there was one point
that was not in dispute: television broadcasts as Part IV subject matter was the
same type of narrow property as that already established for sound recordings
and cinematograph film. Hely J expressed the point in the following terms
when the matter was first before the Full Federal Court: “copyright protection
is confined to the actual images and accompanying sounds broadcast” .” This
was reiterated by Finkelstein J when the matter had been remitted to the Full
Court by the High Court:

Thus there will only be an infringement if the actual broadcast or a substan-
tial part of the broadcast is faithfully copied or rebroadcast. It will not suffice
to show that the defendant has broadcast a colourable copy of the plaintiff's
work as it would in the case of, say, artistic copyright.”

Whatever else was in doubt in this litigation, the narrow nature of television
broadcasts as copyright subject matter (a nature which must be shared by
sound broadcasts) was clear, and in this respect the case confirms a harmonised
approach to all types of audio-visual material recognised as subject matter
under Part IV: sound recordings, cinematograph films and broadcasts.

The issue that was in dispute in TCN Channel Nine v Network Ten was what
were the quantitative metes and bounds of a television broadcast as copyright
subject matter. The Full Court had concluded - in part based on the narrow
qualitative nature of Part IV subject matter - that “a television broadcast in

which copyright may subsist is made whenever visual images and accompany-
ing sounds are broadcast by way of television”. Under this approach each
and every moment of any television broadcast was its own Part IV broadcast
copyright subject matter. A High Court majority rejected this, to some extent
basing its rejection upon the programs-based definition of a “broadcasting
service” inscribed into the Copyright Act from the Broadcasting Services Act:

There can be no absolute precision as to what in any of an infinite possibil-
ity of circumstances will constitute ‘a television broadcast’. However, the
programmes which [the plaintiff] identified ... answer that description.
These broadcasts were put out to the public, the object of the activity of
broadcasting, as discrete periods of broadcasting identified and promoted
by a title, such as The Today Show, Nightline, Wide World of Sports, and the
like, which would attract the attention of the public.”

Thus a television (or radio) broadcast program as conceived of under the

Broadcasting Services Act give the metes and bounds of any particular televi-

sion (or sound) broadcast under the 1968 Act. As is explained in Chapter 5

(see: 5.3.3) this pragmatic answer to the question gave the substantial part

test that applies in relation to the exercise of exclusive rights something to do.

It also left for another day issues such as whether advertisements comprised

television broadcasts (probably, the High Court majority suggested) or

whether “segments” in news broadcasts comprised television broadcasts

(probably not, the High Court majority suggested)”

3.5 Published editions of works

The final Part IV subject matter type is the published edition. It stands alone
as the only Australian copyright subject matter that subsists absent any inter-
national treaty obligation. Its origins have been set out in Lord Hoffmann’s
opinion in Newspaper Licensing Agency v Marks & Spencer, where it was
explained that since the early 20th century:
Publishers were concerned that the skill and labour which had gone into
the typographical design of fine editions of classical works (out of literary
or musical copyright) could be appropriated by other publishers who used
photo-lithography to make facsimile copies.”

The Gregory Committee recommended protection to address those concerns,
a recommendation given effect in the 1956 UK Act and the Spicer Committee
recommended its adoption in Australia, also accepted by the Australian

Parliament. So that the Second Reading Speech to the 1968 Act included the
following example of the mischief that the new copyright was intended to
remedy:
Thus, a publisher who has gone to great trouble and expense to produce an
edition of a work, say, of Shakespeare's plays, by using special type and a
well-designed layout has no protection under existing law against a printer
who photographically reproduces his edition.”
The 1968 Act has no “published edition” definition. It provides that if first
publication of the edition “took place in Australia” or the publisher of the
edition is a qualified person (an Australian citizen, resident or corporation)
then copyright subsists in the “published edition of a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work, or of 2 or more literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
works”. It also denies copyright subsistence to “an edition that reproduces a
previous edition of the same work”. The sole exclusive right attached to the
copyright is “to make a facsimile copy of the edition” and shares a restricted
nature, consistent with all other Part IV subject matter in that only the exact
layout, typesetting and arrangement of the edition is protected. In the UK
published edition copyright has been carried forward into its modern law, its
1988 Act, in a form that is more or less unchanged from its 1956 manifestation.
So that for this Part IV subject matter alone Australian law maintains a high
degree of harmony with UK law. An English textbook has described it as “a
special and narrow type of copyright; what is protected is the image on the
page”?

The basic purpose and scope of this protection seems clear enough. What is
less clear is its boundary. Does subsistence require the publication of a physical
(hard-copy) edition, or would an edition that is merely made available by
its publisher online attract published edition copyright? It seems that Lord
Hoffmann’s statement implies a physical print publication is required:

[T]he frame of reference for the term ‘published edition’ is the language of
the publishing trade. The edition is the product, generally between covers,
which the publisher offers to the public.®

If so, facsimile copy would logically require hard-copy replication of the
copyright owner's edition. While this issue is not entirely clear cut, there is
some evidence that terms in the statute such as “edition” and “facsimile copy”

ProQuest
Ebook Central’

wv Chapter 2: Works

2.1 Introduction

2.2 Originality

2.3 Material form

2.4 Substantialit)

2.5 Literary works

2.6 Dramatic works

2.7 Musical works

2.8 Artistic works

2.9 Works of joint authorship

Chapter 3: Subject Matter Other Than Works

3.1 Introduction

3.2 Sound recordings

3.3 Cinematograph films

3.4 Broadcasts (television and sound)

3.5 Published editions of works

Chapter 4: First Ownership, Co-Ownership
and Term Duration

4.1 Introduction

lorks

4.3 Subject matter other than works

4.4 Crown ownership

4.5 International organizations

4.6 Co-ownership

4.7 Term duration introduction

4.8 Term duration of works

4.9 Term duration of subject matter other
than works

4.11 Term of international organizations’
copyright

Chapter 5: Derivation and Substantial Part

5.1 Introduction

5.2 Derivation

substantial part

Chapter 6: Exclusive Rights

6.1 Introduction

6.2 To reproduce / To copy / To film or
record a broadcast / To make a facsimile
copy

6.3 Works subject matter examples: “to
reproduce”

6.4 Subject matter other than works
examples: “to copy”

65 To publish

6.6 To perform in public / To cause to be
heard or seen in public

6.7 To communicate to the public / re-
broadcast

6.8 To make an adaptation and to
reproduce, publish, perform, or
communicate the adaptation

of the work”.

82 Laddie, Prescott and Vitoria, The Modern Law of Copyright and Designs (Butterworths, 2nd ed,
1995), [8.1].

83 Newspaper Licensing Agency » Marks & Spencer [2002] RPC 4, 231 (Lord Hoffmann).

93

COPYRIGHT LAW

are not understood in the Australian publishing industry as extending beyond
physical editions and copies in print. At the time of the introduction of the
broad-based and technology neutral communication to the public exclusive
right in the Digital Agenda Reforms, the Australian Publishers Association did
not ask for that new right to attach to published edition copyright. It is the
only subject matter in the 1968 Act for which the exclusive right of communica-
tion to the public does not apply.

In an age of desktop publishing, published edition copyright appears
anachronistic and its modern continuation is questionable public policy. In
1983 Walton J referred to it with some justification as “a very peculiar form
of copyright” ®° A case could be made for its repeal. In the meantime it is
likely that the subject matter that is a published edition copyright, in the
hands of the courts, will be interpreted in ways that will lessen its impact.
This can be seen in the way in which the Anglo-Australian authorities have
required the subject matter is conceived of as the whole of any edition - a
matter discussed below. The other way this is likely to be achieved is by
excluding any subject matter other than editions published in print. Lord
Hoffmann’s 2001 opinion comes closest to stating as much: “The edition
is the product, generally between covers, which the publisher offers to the
public” * In this way, while the protection resides in the intangible expressive
choices of layout, typesetting and arrangement, a very particular material
form requirement might be imposed: physical print publication of some sort.
This imposition should, logically, also apply to the concept of a facsimile copy
for infringement purposes.

The only substantive judicial consideration thathas been given to published
editions has involved essentially a single issue: in a newspaper or magazine
style of publication, does published edition copyright subsist merely in the
printed issue in toto, or in each individual article therein, or both the whole
issue and in each article therein. A 1983 UK authority, Machinery Market v
Sheen Publishing, presumed that each article in a magazine - including each
advertisement - attracted published edition copyright.” Wilcox J in Nationwide
News v Copyright Agency disagreed in 1995: having regard to the legal history
of the copyright it was obviously intended that copyright could subsist in a
whole edition, and not in the layout of each work therein as a separate article
published edition copyright This holding was not challenged on appeal
before the Full Federal Court. The House of Lords in 2001 (considering a
divided Court of Appeal in which the majority sided with Wilcox J and a
minority opinion considered that published edition copyright could subsist

84 Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda) Bill 1999, Submission by Australian Publishers
Association, 1 October 1999, 7.

85 Machinery Market v Sheen Publishing [1983] FSR 431, 432.

86 Newspaper Licensing Agency v Marks & Spencer [2002] RPC 4, 231 (Lord Hoffmann).

87 Machinery Market v Sheen Publishing [1983] FSR 431, 432.

88 Nationwide News v Copyright Agency (1995) 55 FCR 271, 283-287.

89 Nationwide News v Copyright Agency (1996) 65 FCR 399.

94

3,

Home

@ O

& &

Search I. Bookshelf 2% Profile @Language @

9 Rt Dk Qae

ign

Page 940f534 4 Db

COPYRIGHT LAW

are not understood in the Australian publishing industry as extending beyond
physical editions and copies in print. At the time of the introduction of the
broad-based and technology neutral communication to the public exclusive
right in the Digital Agenda Reforms, the Australian Publishers Association did
not ask for that new right to attach to published edition copyright. It is the
only subject matter in the 1968 Act for which the exclusive right of communica-
tion to the public does not apply.

In an age of desktop publishing, published edition copyright appears
anachronistic and its modern continuation is questionable public policy. In
1983 Walton J referred to it with some justification as “a very peculiar form
of copyright”. A case could be made for its repeal. In the meantime it is
likely that the subject matter that is a published edition copyright, in the
hands of the courts, will be interpreted in ways that will lessen its impact.
This can be seen in the way in which the Anglo-Australian authorities have
required the subject matter is conceived of as the whole of any edition - a
matter discussed below. The other way this is likely to be achieved is by
excluding any subject matter other than editions published in print. Lord
Hoffmann’s 2001 opinion comes closest to stating as much: “The edition
is the product, generally between covers, which the publisher offers to the
public” © In this way, while the protection resides in the intangible expressive
choices of layout, typesetting and arrangement, a very particular material
form requirement might be imposed: physical print publication of some sort.
This imposition should, logically, also apply to the concept of a facsimile copy
for infringement purposes.

The only substantive judicial consideration that has been given to published
editions has involved essentially a single issue: in a newspaper or magazine
style of publication, does published edition copyright subsist merely in the
printed issue in toto, or in each individual article therein, or both the whole
issue and in each article therein. A 1983 UK authority, Machinery Market v
Sheen Publishing, presumed that each article in a magazine - including each
advertisement - attracted published edition copyright.” Wilcox J in Nationwide
News v Copyright Agency disagreed in 1995: having regard to the legal history
of the copyright it was obviously intended that copyright could subsist in a
whole edition, and not in the layout of each work therein as a separate article
published edition copyright. This holding was not challenged on appeal
before the Full Federal Court.° The House of Lords in 2001 (considering a
divided Court of Appeal in which the majority sided with Wilcox J and a
minority opinion considered that published edition copyright could subsist

I find the notion of a ‘published edition’ of a literary work forming part of
a larger publication very difficult to reconcile with the statutory language,
which, as I have said, was intended to refer to what a publisher would
understand by an edition.”

From this it can be concluded that published edition refers to the whole edition
and similar to the High Court's holding in TCN Channel Nine v Network Ten
discussed above (see: 3.4) this better permits the substantial part test to perform
its role.

90 Newspaper Licensing Agency v Marks & Spencer [2001] RPC 5.
91 Newspaper Licensing Agency v Marks & Spencer [2002] RPC 4, 231 (Lord Hoffmann).

92 Apoint made by Wilcox J in Nationwide News v Copyright Agency (1995) 55 FCR 271, 287 and
a

