First Ownership, Co-Ownership
and Term Duration

4.1 Introduction 96 4.6.3 Entitlement to sue no
4.2 Works 97 4.64 Share of property no
4.2.1 _ Basic first ownership rule: 4.6.5 Summary m
section 35(2) 97 |4.7 Term duration introduction mW
4.2.2 First ownership of works by 4.8 Term duration of works 12
employees: section 35(6) 98 aan | al 1p
8.1 Ingener
4.23 Journalists: section 35(4) 100 482 thet aswan 3005 term
4.24 Certain private commissions: ee tension 14
section 35(5) 100 ,
©) 4.8.3 Whenidentity of author not
4.3 Subject matter other than works 101 generally known us
4.3.1 Sound recordings 101 4.8.4 Works of joint authorship 116
4.3.2 Cinematograph films 102 4.8.5 Works subsisting prior to
4.3.3 Broadcasts - television and 1 May 1969 7
sound 103 |4.9 Term duration of subject matter
4.34 Published editions 103 other than works 118
44 Crown ownership 103 49.1 Sound recordings and
441 Background 103 cinematograph films 18
442 Operation 104 49.2 Term duration of broadcasts -
‘ television and sound n9
443 Prerogative 106
| oe 49.3 Term duration of published
4.5 International organizations 107 editions 120
4.6 Co-ownership 107 | 4.10 Term of Crown copyright 120
4.6.1 Rights as between co-owners 108 | 411 Term of international
4.6.2 Granting licences 109 organizations’ copyright 121
4A Introduction

Assuming that subject matter is of a type that the 1968 Act recognises copyright
subsistence in, there are three other threshold legal questions that typically
require an answer before any consideration of exclusive rights can occur. These
are:

(1) Who is the owner (or exclusive licensee) of the relevant copyright?

(2) What is the term duration of that copyright?

(3) Is that copyright jurisdictionally attached to the copyright territory
governed by the 1968 Act?

This chapter will consider only the first ownership rules governing Part III
works and Part IV subject matter and their various term duration rules. As
explained in Chapter 8 (see 8.1) all Part III and Part IV copyright property is

subject to voluntary assignment or other transfer. The exclusive licensing of
copyright is also dealt with in Chapter 8 (see: 8.2.6). Jurisdictional attachment
issues will be considered in Chapter 13.

4.2 Works
4.21 Basic first ownership rule: section 35(2)

Leaving aside some of the special rules discussed below, including in particu-
lar the voluntary alienation of future copyright by assignment considered in
Chapter 8 (see: 8.2.5) and Crown ownership considered below (see: 4.4), the
authorial subject matter of Part III has a simple and clear starting point for its
ownership in s 35(2) of the 1968 Act: “the author of a literary, dramatic, musical
or artistic work is the owner of any copyright subsisting in the work”. From
Chapter 2 (see: 2.2) the requirement that the author of any work must be a
natural person from whom the work originated was canvassed. Originality and
authorship are “correlative” .’ In the simplest setting whoever has conferred
his or her originality for copyright to subsist in the work is the initial owner of
that copyright. Those who have created an expressive work, even if the work
is based on ideas or themes that are of a public or collective nature, should
individually own the copyright in that expressive work. Thus, in Milpurrurru
v Indofurn a case involving indigenous artists and works incorporating his or
her clan’s shared imagery, a traditional knowledge ownership problem was
perceived to exist in respect of works of indigenous artists that were based
on pre-existing traditions and images. On this von Doussa J rejected the legal
validity of the perception as a matter of copyright ownership in the case before

That problem was whether works incorporating them satisfied the require-
ment of originality so to attract copyright protection. In the present case that
issue has not arisen, and by the end of the trial the copyright ownership of
the artists in each of the eight works was admitted. Although the artworks
follow traditional Aboriginal form and are based on dreaming themes, each
artwork is one of intricate detail and complexity reflecting great skill and
originality.
This was elaborated on ina subsequent decision where von Doussa J expressed
the view, by way of obiter, that an indigenous artist (as copyright owner) may
owe fiduciary obligations to the artist's tribal people by use of the clan’s shared
imagery. If that imagery is being used inappropriately, and the copyright
owner fails to appropriately enforce the copyright, legal action could be taken
by the clan members themselves to compel such enforcement?
In Chapter 2 (see: 2.9) is a consideration of how copyright law characterises
awork asa work of joint authorship. Considered below (see: 4.6) is how, in the

absence of any ownership agreement between joint authors or the application
of a special rule such that relating to employment, joint authors are joint owners
of copyright in equal shares and hold their interests as tenants-in-common -
consistent with the general treatment of all co-ownership of copyright (whether
Part III or Part IV) subject matter.

4.2.2 First ownership of works by employees: section 35(6)

Section 35(6) has remained substantively unaltered since first enactment and
relevantly provides that where a literary, dramatic or artistic work “is made
by the author in pursuance of the terms of his or her employment by another
person under a contract of service or apprenticeship, that other person is the
owner of any copyright subsisting in the work by virtue of [Part III]”. Notably
excluded from the provision are musical works, but for all other works it sets
a default rule which is subject to any countervailing agreement.‘ It also has a
complex relationship with Crown ownership provisions, as explained below.>
For this rule to vest ownership it requires answers to two nested questions:

(1) Was the author in a contract of service (i.e. an employee) as opposed
toacontract for services (i.e. an independent contractor)? Only for the
former can the author's work possibly be subjected to s 35(6).

(2) Assuming the contract is one of employment, was the work made in
the course of employment or outside the employment relationship on
the author's own account? Only for the former can s 35(6) apply to the
work.

The significance of the first question is great. A commercial firm that contracts
with an independent contractor to provide services which include author-
ing and supplying a work will not own copyright in that work under s 35(6).
Rather, under the default rules it will almost always be the independent
contractor who will be the owner under s 35(2).° If the contract is silent on
copyright, an irrevocable licence might be implied in favour of the firm to
exploit the work for the purposes for which the firm caused it to be created.
However, firms typically wish to have the certainty and clear alienability of
copyright ownership. When an independent contractor is engaged by a firm
and work is to be authored by that contractor pursuant to the engagement, firm
ownership can mostly cleanly occur pursuant to a valid written assignment of
future copyright forming part of the initial engagement contract.”
Characterisation of the author either as an employee or an independent
contractor can have a binary impact on who owns the copyright. In the ordi-
nary course of events whether a firm is employing the author in some capacity
or other should be clear enough given the array of taxation, superannuation.
and workers’ compensation obligations that apply uniquely to employment

FIRST OWNERSHIP, CO-OWNERSHIP AND TERM DURATION

relationships. So that in Redrock Holdings v Hinkley, Harper J of the Victorian
Supreme Court could observe:

There is other evidence which satisfies me that Mr Hinkley was employed
under a contract of service. He was on a fixed salary, from which group
tax was deducted. He signed an Australian Taxation Office Employee
Declaration on 3 November 1995. He was entitled to annual leave, to sick
leave and to long service leave. Superannuation contributions were made
by Redrock on his behalf

Conversely, most independent contractors will have the responsibility for
collecting the goods and services taxation (GST) from the fees that they charge
the firm. It seems that only in irregular situations (such as in a cash-economy
setting) or in new relationship types (such as those in the emerging “gig
economy”) is there likely to exist ambiguity as to whether two people are in
an employment or an arms-length contract.’ It is in those situations that the
common law test has particular relevance: does the person who is said to be an
“employer” have the requisite right to control the manner in which the other
does the work?!

In practice it is the second question that more typically gives rise to ambi-
guity and disputation: has the act of authorship occurred by an employee
inside or outside the course of employment? These are ultimately fact-specific
determinations. For example, a Full Federal Court placed weight in the post-
employment conduct of the party asserted to be the copyright owner pursuant
to s 35(6) to conclude that the questionnaire in issue had not been authored
in the course of the former employee’s employment.” In Redrock Holdings v
Hinkley, Harper J found certain software (the 1997 version of the AppWarrior
library) had been authored by Hinkley in the course of his employment
whereas certain other software (the Hotline online chat program) had been
authored by him on his own account and not in pursuance of his contract of
employment.” Moore J in EdSonic v Cassidy has offered this statement:

There is no authority of which I am aware which addresses, directly, the
scope of the expression ‘is made by the author in pursuance of the terms of
his or her employment’. However, what the expression raises for considera-
tion ... is not the bare question of whether the author is employed under a
contract of service at the time a work is made but whether the relevant work
is made in furtherance of the contract of employment with the employer.

COPYRIGHT LAW

That is, did the employee make the work because the contract of employ-
ment expressly or impliedly required or least authorised the work to be
made.
In that case Moore J found that the work, training materials, had been authored
by an employee not pursuant to her employment contract but rather on her
own account. As such s 35(6) could not apply.

4.2.3 Journalists: section 35(4)

There is a statutory qualification upon s 35(6) in s 35(4), a provision that was
reformed in 1998." In its current form the provision provides that journalists
employed by newspapers, magazines or similar periodicals retain copyright
ownership in respect of: (i) the reproduction of their literary, dramatic or
artistic works for inclusion “in a book”; or (ii) reproduction of those works,
by someone other than the employer, by hard-copy facsimile reproduction
from a paper edition.** All other ownership rights, including and especially
those related to the online digital exploitation of journalists’ works as articles,
remain with the employer by virtue of the operation of s 35(6). The rule again
is merely a default rule that can be replaced by agreement."

4.2.4 Certain private commissions: section 35(5)

There is one other exceptional and special rule which cuts across both the
basic rule in s 35(2) and the employment rule in s 35(6). Concerning certain
privately commissioned artistic works, s 35(5) was, like the s 35(4) journal-
ist rule, reformed in 1998.” It vests copyright ownership in a commissioner
who contracts with an author to take a photograph “for private or domestic
purposes”, to paint or draw a portrait, or to make an engraving. However,
the author holds a residual statutory right of action to restrain exploitation of
the copyright that occurs contrary to any communicated purpose for which
the work was required by the commissioner at the time of contract.® For
example, the artist who is commissioned to paint a family portrait merely for
the purpose of that artwork being displayed in a family’s home could restrain
subsequent commercialisation of the artwork by its mass reproduction. Within

independent contract settings, the rule reverses the normal ownership posi-
tion, vesting copyright in the commissioner. Within employment settings, the
rule confers upon the author a statutory right of action to restrain outside
purpose exploitation that he or she would not otherwise have." In both cases,
the rule is, like the employment rule itself and its journalism qualifying rule,
a default rule displaceable by contract.”°

4.3. Subject matter other than works

Unlike Part III’s simple and clear starting point of s 35(2) for all works - the
author is the owner - each of the four subject matter types of Part IV has its
own initial ownership default rules. Each rule is subject to the Crown copyright
provisions (see: 4.4) and the alienability of copyright by valid assignment
discussed in Chapter 8 (see: 8.1).

4.31 Sound recordings

The default rules attaching to the first ownership of sound recordings are
intricate. For sound recordings that do not include the sounds of a human
performer, the rule is that the maker of the sound recording is the owner of
the Part IV copyright in the recording, where that maker is deemed to be the
person who “owned that record at that time” — i.e. the owner of the chattel
that is the master copy.

However, many sound recordings of commercial value are likely to include
the sounds of a human performance, defined as a “live performance”, and for
those the default rules differ.” These different rules were enacted in 2004 and
came into effect on 1 January 2005 as part of a raft of reforms intended to
make Australian law comply with obligations in the WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) which require that performers be given economic
rights in sound recordings of their performances.” In such cases both the
performer or performers are deemed to be joint makers of the sound recording,
together with the person who owns the chattel property in the master copy at
the time of the recording - assuming that a performer is not the chattel owner.
As such each maker will be an owner and where there is more than one owner
of copyright in such a recording “the owners own the copyright as tenants in
common in equal share” - specified in s 97(2A), which codifies the general joint
ownership rule explained below.’ Some other complications arise for sound

recordings made of live performances. The 1968 Act makes clear that in the
case of an employee performer, “the employer is taken to be the maker instead
of that performer” unless that statutory presumption is displaced by contract.”*
The WPPT applies a principle of the Berne Convention that essentially make
its protections retrospective to the extent of applying to all sound recordings
subsisting within their copyright term at the time it commenced.” As such
the 1968 Act also provides a set of parallel provisions which apply to such
existing sound recordings. Because these result in a retrospective adjustment
of proprietary rights (e.g. a sole proprietor of copyright in a live performance
might now, by force of law, equally share that interest with the performers)
these provisions have been drafted in a way intended to avoid characterisation
as an acquisition of property not on just terms.” It was also thought possible
that the relatively sudden nature of the reform could have had prejudicial
proprietary effects on sound producers in relation to sound recordings of live
performances made after commencement - i.e. those who had invested and
contracted on the assumption of sole proprietorship prior to 1 January 2005.
Out of an abundance of caution, a separate provision was added intended to
close off any argument that the primary provisions effected any acquisition of
property not on just terms in any such cases.

Coming over the top of all of this is a provision which vests initial owner-
ship in a person who contracts with another to make a sound recording.**
Thus, a company who contracts with performers (or their employers) and a
recording studio to make a sound recording will, in the ordinary course of
events, be the sole owner of the Part IV copyright in the sound recording by
virtue of this provision.

4.3.2 Cinematograph films

The default rule is that the maker of a cinematograph film is the owner of
the Part IV copyright subsisting in the film, where the “maker” as discussed
in Chapter 3 (see: 3.3) is the person who undertook the arrangements neces-
sary for the production of the first copy of the film.” Effectively this is the
film producer, typically a production company. Similar to sound recordings,
coming over the top is a provision which vests initial ownership in a person
who contracts with another to make a film - defined in the provisions as a

“commissioned film” .** In 2005 quite narrow reform occurred which has the
effect of film directors (or their employers) being deemed a maker of non-
commissioned films and, for the film copyright, the owners of the subset of
the communication to the public right that consists simply of the “right to
include the film in a retransmission of a free-to-air broadcast” 4 This confers
upon film directors a default entitlement to a royalties distribution under the
Part VC (statutory licence) regime which is discussed in Chapter 9 (see: 9.4.2).

4.3.3 Broadcasts — television and sound

The default rule is that the person who provided the “broadcasting service”
that delivered the broadcast is the maker of the broadcast and the owner of the
Part IV copyright in the broadcast.° A “broadcasting service” itself is a defined
term under the Broadcasting Services Act and discussed in Chapter 3 (see: 3.4).

4.3.4 Published editions

The default rule is that the person who is the publisher of an edition of a work
or works is also the owner of the Part IV copyright subsisting in that edition.*

44 Crown ownership
4.41 Background

Gordon Robbie, then the Head of Copyright of Her Majesty's Stationery Office,
has observed:

Prior to the 1911 Copyright Act, the Crown was not differentiated against in
the matter of copyright, but held only the same rights as any other copyright
owner (leaving aside Royal prerogative), and was not much inclined to
exercise those rights until provoked by the blatant plagiarism by some
commercial publishers for their own profit of material produced, for exam-
ple, by the War Office, the Patent Office, the Privy Council Office and, not
least, Ordnance Survey. There followed the Copyright Act of 1911, in which
Parliament chose, for the first time, to statutorily define Crown copyright.”

Section 18 of the 1911 Act provided in part that “where any work has ... been
prepared or published by or under the direction or control of His Majesty or
any Government department, the copyright in the work shall, subject to any
agreement with the author, belong to His Majesty”. The provision received
little consideration by the UK Parliament at the time of first enactment.
Finkelstein J has provided a history of the provision in 2007 by way of obiter.*®

There referenced was Macgillivray’s 1912 annotation to the provision which
explained that the copyright ownership of the Crown in government publica-
tions such as maps, reports and other papers prior to the 1911 Act’s provision
“[had] not been very clear”. Neither the Gregory Committee nor the Spicer
Committee paid the issue of Crown copyright ownership attention. In 2000
the Australian Ergas Committee recommended that the successor provisions
in the 1968 Act be repealed because they offended competitive neutrality
principles by putting governments in a better position relative to either their
private contractors or to other private employers.” The issue was given to the
CLRC - which was its final reference before its disestablishment - and its 2005
recommendations endorsed the repeal of the modern Australian provisions.
Those recommendations have not been acted on by Parliament.

4.4.2 Operation

In view of the history set out above (see: 4.4.1) modern law preserves Crown-
friendly ownership default rules which are similar to s 18 of the 1911 Act
and may be displaced by agreement. There are two basic ways in which
the Crown, in right of either State or Commonwealth, may by default be the
copyright owner: (i) where works, sound recordings or films are made by
it, or under its direction or control (Crown-made);# or (ii) where works are
first published in Australia by it, or under its direction or control (Crown-
published). In relation to the latter it is important to emphasise any act of
publication by the Crown must be authorised by the owner of copyright in
the unpublished work for copyright ownership to pass to the Crown.* As
the CLRC pointed out, any asserted application of the 1968 Act that leads
to involuntary transfers of copyright to the Crown on its first publication
raised the constitutional question of whether an acquisition of property had
occurred not on just terms. Moreover, all the Crown ownership provisions
are subject to Part X of the 1968 Act and are thus subject to the possibility

of alteration by assignment, including assignment of future copyright.”
Allied provisions involve special rules touching on jurisdictional attachment
which are dealt with in Chapter 13 (see: 13.3).

On a referral from the Copyright Tribunal, the Full Federal Court in
Copyright Agency v New South Wales was faced with ownership claims being
made by the New South Wales government in works claimed to be both
Crown-made and Crown-published. The works in question were land survey-
ors’ plans that had been prepared and lodged for the purposes of the Torrens
Title land registration regime in New South Wales administered by the Lands
and Property Information (LPI) division of the New South Wales Department
of Lands. The LPI sought to publicly commercialise its repository of plans and
members of the plaintiff included surveyors who were authors of the plans as
artistic works (drawings). The Crown (in right of New South Wales) argued
that plans prepared in compliance with New South Wales land law had been
made under its direction or control and that by making the plans available to
the public it had also first published the plans in Australia under its direction
or control. Both submissions were rejected.

On the Crown-made submission, the Full Court held that the New South
Wales government, by prescribing the criteria for land registration and thus
the general form of a survey plan, did not by those laws “direct or control the
making of the plan”. Rather it was found that a survey plan “is prepared by
a surveyor to satisfy the contractual obligation of the surveyor to his client” “°
As such the ownership provisions relating to Crown-made works had no
application.

On the Crown-published submission, the Full Court found as a factual
matter that relevant acts of publication (reproductions supplied to the public
other than “merely colourable” supplies®) had occurred prior to the New
South Wales government making the plans available. In particular, Emmett J
for the Full Court stated:

[E]ach Relevant Plan must have been provided by the surveyor to the owner

of the land for signature. That was a publication. In so far as the Relevant

Plans effect subdivisions, it was necessary for them to be provided to the

local municipal council for a subdivision certificate. That also constituted

publication. Both acts of publication must of necessity have preceded regis-
tration and publication by the State2*

As such, there was found to be no first publication by the New South Wales

government through the LPI to enliven the Crown-published ownership rule.

Subject matter that is Crown-made intersects with the more general owner-

ship rules. Besanko J has observed on the general employment default rule

for works (s 35(6)) and the Crown-made default rule for works (s 176(2)) that:

It is clear, I think, that both ss 176(2) and 35(6) may apply to the one factual
situation. In some circumstances, s 176(2) may have a wider operation than
s 35(6). For example, s 176(2) may apply to a contractor. On the other hand,
a work may be made in pursuance of the terms of a contract with the Crown
within s 35(6), but not be made under the direction or control of the Crown
within s 176(2).”
When recommending the repeal of both the Crown-made and Crown-published
ownership rules, the CLRC considered that if enacted “governments will rely
heavily on s 35(6), the general provision that gives employers ownership of
copyright in their employees’ works”. As such, and given the range of roles
that people perform for government beyond that of an employee (such as the
appointees to the CLRC itself) it recommended that s 35(6) be amended to also
include that the ownership of works “produced by an officer or servant of the
Crown in the course of his or her duties” should vest with the Crown.* None
of these CLRC recommendations have been the subject of reform.

4.4.3 Prerogative

Aside from the Crown ownership provisions, the 1968 Act since first enact-
ment provides that it does not “affect any prerogative right or privilege of
the Crown”. Such rights or privileges have their provenance in the Crown's
historical role as the authoritative publisher of public law and works of the
Church of England. Although these rights are not copyright per se, they are
proprietary rights in the nature of copyright. The rights are indefinite in dura-
tion and to the extent that such rights persist in modern Australia, they most
obviously attach to the Crown in right of each State and the Commonwealth
in respect of statute law.” There is a debate as to the scope of the prerogative
beyond that - for example judges’ reasons for their decisions is a particularly
fraught copyright issue in which there is debate as to whether: the Crown
ownership provisions should apply, the prerogative rights of the Crown
should apply or neither should apply.» The CLRC recommended in 2005 the
abolition of the prerogative rights by way of copyright. In 1984 an amend-
ment implemented a Franki Committee recommendation that “any act that is
excluded from infringement of copyright under that Act should equally not be

” 59

an infringement of any ‘prerogative copyright’ of the Crown”.

45 International organizations

An obligation attached to the Universal Copyright Convention 1952 (which
Australia ratified on 1 February 1969 - after the passing of the 1968 Act, but
prior to its commencement - and entered into force on 24 May 1969 shortly
after the Act’s commencement on 1 May 1969) extended the Convention's
protection inter alia “to works published for the first time by the United
Nations” or by its “Specialized Agencies in relationship therewith”. To give
effect to this, provisions have existed since the enactment of the 1968 Act to
extend Australian copyright protection to such international organizations.
Currently, these provisions apply to the benefit of 21 international organiza-
tions (including the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization and the World
Intellectual Property Organization) that are declared by regulation.” Insofar as
provisions control first ownership, they essentially mirror in effect the Crown
ownership provisions discussed above (see: 4.4.2) and are similarly subject to
the possibility of alteration by assignment.® Also similar to the Crown regime
are allied provisions for special jurisdictional attachment that are discussed in
Chapter 13 (see: 13.5). Declared organizations are thus deemed to be the first
owners of works, sound recordings or cinematograph films made by them,
or under their direction or control.“ Where Australian jurisdiction is only
attracted to that subject matter by reason of first publication, and a declared
organization had so published the subject matter, or the publication was under
its direction or control, that organization is also deemed to be first owner.*

46 Co-ownership

As mentioned in Chapter 2 (see: 2.9), the 1968 Act separately defines a work
of joint authorship and a body of jurisprudence exists around that work type.
Given the default ownership rule that the author is the owner of copyright in
a work, a logical next step is that multiple authors are co-owners. Likewise,
if there are joint makers or commissioners of a film the default rules lead to
co-owners.” Similarly, the assignment of copyright to more than one legal
entity, or the transmission of copyright to multiple beneficiaries of a deceased
person, without specifying individual shares. It is generally accepted that
co-owners of copyright in all these situations hold title as tenants in common

in equal shares unless an agreement or obligation to the contrary exists. There
exists in the 1968 Act no general provision equivalent to s 16 of the Patents Act
1990 (Cth) which defines the extent of each patent co-owner’s rights. In Anglo-
Australian copyright, these are largely things that have been left, rightly or
wrongly, to case law. However, there is one codified copyright rule in s 97(2A)
of the 1968 Act for sound recordings of live performances that was added on
1 January 2005 as part of the WPPT reforms: “[i]f there is more than one owner
of the copyright in a sound recording of a live performance, the owners own
the copyright as tenants in common in equal shares”

As a general law rule, this outcome is always subject to countervailing
agreement. However, the modern authors of the famous UK copyright text-
book Copinger & Skone James question the absoluteness of co-owners holding
as tenants in common under the general law.” Those authors consider that
“the circumstances may show a contrary intention” and they give the example
of “a strong inference that the property of husband and wife was intended to
be held as joint tenants”. Whether there is that much appetite for flexibility
awaits to be revealed in future case law.

4.6.1 Rights as between co-owners

In 1879 Jessell MR, when holding that one co-owner of copyright could not
grant a valid licence without the consent of all owners, refused to extend the
“antiquated and barbarous” doctrines relating to chattel property owned by
tenants in common (i.e. one owner can use the chattel as it pleases, so long
as it did not injure or destroy the property) to copyright” This holding was
extended in 1916 with the holding in Cescinsky v George Routledge & Sons that
co-owners who exercised the exclusive reproduction right of the copyright
without consent of all owners were infringers.” Emphatically rejected was
a submission consistent with chattel property rules: that the defendants as

co-owners subject to an obligation to account to other co-owners were entitled

to exploit the property. Rowlatt J stated:
I think this contention is negatived by the words of the Copyright Act,
1911. By [s 2(1)] ‘copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed by
any person who, without the consent of the owner of the copyright, does
anything the sole right to do which is by this Act conferred on the owner of
the copyright’ By virtue of the Interpretation Act the singular includes the
plural. Therefore a reproduction without the consent of all the owners is an
infringement, and I do not see why one co-owner is not as much within the
statute as a stranger. ... Apart, however, from the statute, if this were not
so, a part owner would be at the mercy of his co-owners, each of whom,
and they might be any number, might issue as many, as large, and as cheap
editions as he chose, thus completely ruining the value of the copyright. In
my opinion, the old common law rule as to the right of a co-owner to use
the common property has no application to such a property as a copyright.
It seems to me that a sole right of reproducing, though divisible as to title,
must be indivisible as to exercise.

The policy underpinning this seems to hold today as a matter of principle,
and a modern Australian application of it occurred in Campbell v Zeiher.”’ The
plaintiff there asserted co-ownership of a literary work by joint authorship and
successfully obtained interlocutory injunctive relief restraining publication of
that work by the defendant, who also appeared to be a co-owner by reason of
joint authorship.

4.6.2 Granting licences

In Campbell v Zeiher a competing legal analysis was considered. That analysis
was based on the language of the infringement provision of the 1968 Act,
s 36(1), which requires for liability an exercise in Australia of copyright by
a person who commits that exercise “not being the owner of the copyright,
and without the licence of the owner of the copyright”. The same language
is repeated in the Part IV counterpart provision, s 101(1). On the face of the
statute liability requires (by reason of the “and”) for both conditions to be
satisfied thus rendering any co-owner immune from Liability. The text of
ss 36(1) and 101(1) is dislocated from the case law.” As such, the only way to
overcome the provisions is to read them through the lens of the case law: the
text commencing with “and” must be interpreted to mean “or without the
licence of all of the owners of the copyright”. Buchanan J in Campbell v Zeiher
observed that this was the effect of both Wilcox J’s decision in Prior v Sheldon
and Lindgren J's approach as part of the Full Court majority in Seven Network
(Operations) » TCN Channel Nine. In Seven Network (Operations) a co-owner
of film copyright, Murray, had a limited licence from the plaintiff co-owner

(a broadcaster) to use the film for certain promotional activities. Acting beyond
that licence, Murray purported to grant a further licence to a broadcaster who
was a rival to the plaintiff. Lindgren J's restatement adhered to the existing
case law: “[i]n the absence of the consent of the other co-owner, one co-owner
is neither entitled to do an act comprised in the copyright, nor to grant a licence
toa third party to do such an act, and the non-consenting co-owner is entitled
to an injunction against the infringing co-owner or putative licensee” 7°

46.3 Entitlement to sue

A further development of principle occurred in Prior v Lansdowne Press where
Gowans] of the Victorian Supreme Court accepted that a co-owner of copyright
could sue for its infringement without joining the other owners as plaintiffs,
and thereby both seek an injunction and “recover compensation in respect of
the injury suffered by him, that is, in respect of so much of the copyright as
belongs to him”.” This was implicitly accepted in Nine Films and Television
v Ninox Television so that in seeking a declaration of non-infringement the
plaintiff was permitted to join another co-owner (TVNZ) on the basis that any
co-owner could bring proceedings for infringement.”

4.6.4 Share of property

Finally, there is the issue of share. Equal share is the orthodox rule.*t However
Copinger & Skone James make the argument that there is no common law rule:
“itis suggested that the statement in Ray v Classic FM [1998] FSR 622 that joint
authors hold the copyright as tenants in common in equal shares is wrong”
The textbook explains that “the circumstances may indicate otherwise” point-
ing (inter alia) to the facts in Prior v Lansdowne Press.** There a publishing
agreement between the co-owners provided for an unequal split in royalties
(60%, 30% and 10%) and Gowans J held that “for the purpose of this case, the
copyright was held by the co-owners as tenants in common in unequal shares
according with those proportions” It seems to await authoritative resolution,
although the common law default presumption of equal shares appears to
remain good law, and indeed as noted above in s 97(2A) it has been codified
in the 1968 Act for the particular setting relating to sound recordings of live
performances.* Moreover, in Prior v Lansdowne Press the circumstance that

displaced the presumption of equality was a royalty share agreement which
could be rightly seen as evidence of a countervailing beneficial ownership
agreement that overrode the presumption.

4.6.5 Summary

In view of the discussion above, the following points about co-owned copy-
right property can be made:

* Aside from the statutory rule in s 97(2A) which prescribes co-ownership
as tenants in common subject to contrary formal agreement, the general
law position is also co-ownership as tenants in common subject to any
contrary agreement - with perhaps the possibility of matrimonial
copyright property being held as joint tenants.

* Aside from the statutory rule in s 97(2A) which prescribes an equal
share subject to contrary formal agreement, the general law position
presumes an equal share unless displaced by contrary agreement - or
perhaps merely circumstances that indicate such an agreement.

* At general law co-owners are precluded from exercising the rights in
the copyright or conferring a licence for others to exercise those rights,
unless done with the consent of all other co-owners, - however the text
of ss 36(1) and 101(1) is dislocated from this long-accepted principle.

* At general law all co-owners may sue for infringement in their own
right without joining the other co-owners, and may obtain injunctive
relief, although pecuniary remedies will be awarded on a pro-rata
basis.

Therefore, outside s 97(2A) and the general law rules regarding a single
co-owner’s standing to sue and entitlement to remedies, much of the law
relating to the rights of co-owners is clouded by the fuzziness that inheres in
common law method and by the disjuncture between general law principles
and ss 36(1) and 101(1). Arguably, a net benefit would arise from adding to
the 1968 Act provisions akin to s 16 of the Patents Act 1990 (Cth) so as to clarify
and codify the applicable principles in Australian law.

47 Term duration introduction

As a matter of legal history, term duration has been one of the more contested
issues in copyright law’s evolution. A summary of the Anglo-Australian
statutory term history of the most fundamental copyright subject matter, the
published literary work, reveals:

1709: From publication an initial 14-year term, then if the author is alive
at the expiration of the initial term, a further 14-year term

1814: From publication an initial 28-year term, then if the author is alive
at the expiration of the initial term, a further term of the residue of
the author's life

1842: From publication a term of life of the author plus seven years
post-mortem, subject to an overarching minimum term of 42 years
in all cases

1911: From publication a term of life of the author plus 50 years post-
mortem, consistent with the 1908 Berne revision

2004: From publication a term of life of the author plus 70 years post-
mortem, consistent with the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement.

The parliamentary debates that culminated with the first post-mortem term
in 1842 reveal that the political fervour sometimes associated with copyright
in the 21st century is hardly unique to it. Thus, Macaulay stated in 1841 to the
House of Commons his famous opposition to any post-mortem term in an
address that included:

Men of a character very different from that of the present race of piratical
booksellers will soon infringe this intolerable monopoly. Great masses of
capital will be constantly employed in the violation of the law. Every art
will be employed to evade legal pursuit; and the whole nation will be in
the plot. ... And you will find that, in attempting to impose unreasonable
restraints on the reprinting of the works of the dead, you have, to a great
extent, annulled those restraints which now prevent men from pillaging
and defrauding the living.

Opinions will differ today on what extent Macaulay's 1841 prophesy has been
vindicated or debunked.

48 Term duration of works
4.8.1 In general

By s1, the 1911 Act conferred copyright protection in every “original” literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic work when, in the case of an unpublished work,
the author was a British subject or resident, and in the case of a published
work it was first published within the British dominion.” Publication for the
purposes of this distinction was defined tightly in the terms of a new Berne
norm: the issue of copies to the public.** However, for the copyright term, a
broader concept of the moment of first making the work public attracted impor-
tant legal significance. In general, unpublished literary, dramatic and musical
works and engravings maintained a perpetual copyright term until publication,
from which point the standard finite term of life of the author plus 50 years
applied or, in the case of posthumous publication, 50 years from the moment
of publication. However, for unpublished lectures, dramatic or musical
works a finite standard term would also commence from the moment of first

public delivery or performance.” By this the 1911 Act introduced the concepts
of an unpublished work with an indefinite statutory term while it remains
undisclosed to the public and certain unpublished works with a finite statu-
tory term determined from the date of its first public disclosure. The indefinite
terms in the 1911 Act for certain unpublished works, which exceeded the Berne
standard, can be explained as a codification of the prior common law position
which had hitherto recognised perpetual copyright in unpublished works.”

This was all carried forward until quite recently into the 1968 Act: under
529 the narrow Berne informed meaning of publication was maintained in the
sense of provision of copies to the public. As is explained in Chapter 13 (see:
13.2.5 and 13.4.1.1) first publication in this sense is still used in current law for
jurisdictional attachment. Prior to its recent reform, s 33(3) set an indefinite
copyright term for literary works (other than computer programs), dramatic
works or musical works so long as those works during the life of their authors:
remained unpublished in the s 29 sense; were not performed in public; were
not included in a broadcast; and no records of the works have been offered
for sale to the public. If any of those acts of disclosure occurred, these works
received the finite term of 50 (from 2005, 70) years commencing upon the acts
occurring after the death of the relevant author. Engravings too received a
separate indefinite term in s 33(5) while they remained unpublished in the
529 sense, with the standard term of 50 (from 2005, 70) years upon publication
after the death of the author. Conversely unpublished, undisclosed computer
programs and artistic works (other than engravings) were denied indefinite
terms; from satisfaction of subsistence requirements, these were subject to the
standard finite term of life of the author plus 50 (from 2005, 70) years.

An aspect of 2017 reforms that commenced on 1 January 2019 abolished
indefinite copyright terms for works, following a 2013 ALRC observation.*
These reforms introduced in s 29A a new concept of a work being “made
public” when: it or its adaptation is published in the s 29 sense, performed in
public, communicated to the public, included as sounds on records offered
to the public; or if an artistic work, the work is exhibited in public, included
ina film that is seen in public, or a constructed building.” Such an act will
only make a work public when the act is authorised by the relevant owner.
Those works which had enjoyed indefinite terms before 1 January 2019, and

which had been first made public in their post-mortem terms prior to 1 January
2019, receive a term of “70 years after the calendar year in which the work
was first made public” .”” More generally, s 33(3) now provides that if a work
has not been made public the term of copyright subsistence is the standard
finite term of until “70 years after the calendar year in which the author of the
work died”. This treats all works the same way that computer programs and
artistic works (other than engravings) had been treated under the prior law.
The reform had a sweepingly retrospective quality: all works which previously
enjoyed indefinite copyright terms had their terms harmonised with the term
applicable to published works.”

4.8.2 The 1 January 2005 term extension

In relation to all works with known authors where the works were made
public, the 2017 reforms (inserting s 29A) did not alter the status quo."° Under
s 33 works with known authors made public before or after the commencement
date of 1 January 2019 receive the same copyright term as applied prior to the
reforms: subsistence until 70 years after the calendar year in which the author
died”

‘A more complicated issue had arisen in respect of all works made public
when their terms (together with those of made public sound recording and
films) were extended by at least 20 years on 1 January 2005. This arose from
the art 17.4(4) obligation in the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement 2004. The
amending legislation made explicit that the extension applied only to “copy-
right in works and other subject matter that subsists on or after” the date
of commencement - which was 1 January 2005. Thus no copyright subject
matter, including in published photographs which received the most radical
term extension at that time, with an expired term and in the public domain was
revived. The US-Australia Free Trade Agreement was explicit that the term
extension applied to photographic works. However, photographs receive
less favourable treatment than most works under Berne, with a minimum
term of 25 years from making."* As noted above, prior to 1 January 2019

unpublished, undisclosed artistic works such as photographs had received
an indefinite term. However, published photographs had, prior to 1 January
2005, received a term of “50 years after the expiration of the calendar year in
which the photograph is first published” which would typically limit the term
of protection in most professionally taken photographs to the shortest term for
all work types." Thus, the change on 1 January 2005 to a term of life of the
photographer plus 70 years was a particularly steep increase for published
photographs. However, no published photograph that had entered the public
domain on that date, even if its author were still alive, would have its copyright
subsistence revived.*® Thus in all cases of work term duration prior to the
application of s 33 a threshold question must be asked: had the work's term
expired before 1 January 2005?

4.8.3. When identity of author not generally known

As is apparent, in current law the basis of term duration for any work is based
upon an identification of who is the author of the work. This begs the ques-
tion of the term duration for works where the identity of the author is not
generally known - such as anonymous or pseudonymous authorship, which
may include joint authorship by employees in large organisations which is
canvassed in Chapter 2.”

Prior to 1 January 2019 the finite term for such works was a period of 50
(from 2005, 70) years from a publication in the s 29 sense, so long as author
identity remained not generally known or reasonably knowable in that peri-
od. From 1 January 2019, under the 2017 reforms, the starting point for the
finite term of all such works that had already be made public became: “70 years
after the calendar year in which the work was first made public” .*” Given the
breadth of how a work may be “made public” in s 29A (as opposed to there
being a “publication” in the s 29 sense) the 2017 reforms effected a subtle,
retrospective shifting of dates that might lead to certain published anonymous
or pseudonymous works entering the public domain on 1 January 2019 if they
had been first made public earlier by means other than s 29." If author identity
is revealed while copyright subsists, the standard term of author's life plus 70
years applies.™

From 1 January 2019 works without a generally known author receive
differential term treatment on the basis of whether or not they have been first
made public within 50 years of their being made. Those that are first made
public in that 50-year window, receive a term of 70 years after the calendar year
in which they were made public, so long as in that 70-year period the identity
of the author is not revealed." Those that are not made public in that 50-year
window receive the lesser term of 70 years from their making - again so long
as in that 70-year period the identity of the author is not revealed.” In either
case if the author's identity is revealed while copyright subsists, the standard
term of author's life plus 70 years applies.™

4.8.4 Works of joint authorship

The work of joint authorship entered into UK copyright consciousness with the
case of Levy v Rutley in 1871 so that the Gorell Committee in 1908 considered
the issue of term duration in such a work."° That Committee took the view
(by majority) that where a work is the production of joint authors, the term
of copyright should be life of the author who lives the longest and for the
fixed post-mortem term after that surviving author's death." Clearly this
was not congenial to the politics of the day, and was not accepted at the time
of the 1911 Act.” However, after the Brussels Berne revision obliged Berne
Union members to essentially the same term rule as suggested by the Gorell
Committee, the Gregory Committee endorsed it, the 1956 UK Act enacted
it, the Spicer Committee accepted it and it was adopted in the 1968 Act." It
remains our current law.”

The 1968 Act has since enactment also provided some pragmatic deeming
rules regarding works of joint authorship in which a joint author is known,
whereas another is not generally known - for example, an authorial collabo-
ration between a celebrity or sportsperson and their ghost writer. Term
duration in all cases is determined by life of the author plus a post-mortem
term based upon the life of “the author whose identity was disclosed or if the

identity of 2 or more of the authors was disclosed - whichever of those authors
died last” 17

4.8.5 Works subsisting prior to 1 May 1969

Literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works were all recognised as such
under the 1911 Act. As noted above the duration of protection was indefinite
in unpublished literary, dramatic or musical works and engravings, and then
from publication life of the author and 50 years or in the case of posthumous
publication, 50 years from publication. Artistic works other than engravings
merely received life of the author and 50 years with the exception of the 50
years from making term for photographs.” Upon the commencement of the
1968 Act on 1 May 1969, Part III provisions of the 1968 Act relating to subsist-
ence generally applied to existing works.™ At the same time a provision made
explicit that nothing in the 1968 Act could revive copyright that had expired
under the 1911 Act” Broader issues of the jurisdictional attachment of pre
1 May 1969 subject matter are dealt with in Chapter 13 (see: 13.6 and 13.7).

Many works that have entered the public domain are likely to have
commenced their protection under the regime of the 1911 Act. Published works
whose relevant author had died prior to 1955 would not have received the
20-year term extension that commenced on 1 January 2005, and these would
have clearly entered the public domain Unpublished, undisclosed works
subject to the term curtailment that commenced on 1 January 2019 will pass
from an indeterminate period of copyright to the public domain, together with
all previously made public works, if their relevant author had died prior to
1948.7

Conversely, and by way of example, a literary work published during the
life of an author who died in 1955 would have passed from protection under
the regime of the 1911 Act to the 1968 Act on 1 May 1969 as a then subsisting
work. Upon the expiry of 2005 subsistence would have ended, but for the
20-year term extension that took effect on 1 January 2005. The 2017 reforms
have no effect on the term of such a work, and its term will expire on 1 January
2026.

4.9 Term duration of subject matter other than works
4.91 Sound recordings and cinematograph films

Sound recordings and cinematograph films have, from a term perspective,
been treated similarly under the 1968 Act. As first enacted, Part IV copyright
subsisted in each until publication and then for 50 years thereafter.” This
became for 70 years from 1 January 2005 in ss 93 and 94, with the term extension
operating as it did with works - ie. not reviving any public domain recording
or films.” Under this regime, publication for recordings occurred only on
the supply of copies to the public and for films only on the letting for hire or
supply of copies to the public. This meant that both recordings and films
received an indefinite term until such publication. When abolishing indefinite
terms for works, these Part IV indefinite terms were also abolished. Thus,
from 1 January 2019 recordings and films received a fixed term of 70 years
from making, unless made public within 50 years from that making in which
case the term is 70 years after the calendar year when the material was first
made public.” Under the “made public” concept introduced from 1 January
2019, recordings and films are made public if: published; copies are offered to
be supplied to the public; they are heard in public; they are communicated to
the public; or, in the case of films, they are seen in public.” In each case these
acts will only make the recording or film public if that act is done with the
authority of the copyright owners."

No recording or film that was made since the 1 May 1969 commencement
of the 1968 Act has entered the public domain; under current law the earliest
this will occur is 1 January 2040. The only recording and films with expired
terms are those which commenced their terms under the 1911 Act.

As explained in Chapter 3, both recordings and films received some
recognition as works in the regime of 1911 Act.’ The 1911 Act had provided
that “copyright shall subsist in records, perforated rolls, and other contrivances
by means of which sounds may be mechanically reproduced, in like manner
as if such contrivances were musical works”. The 1968 Act, as first enacted,
applied to sound recordings made prior to 1 May 1969 with a term of “50
years after the expiration of the calendar year in which the recording was
made” .” When obliged by the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement to extend

copyright protection to not less than 70 years after first authorised publication,
this provision was repealed: provided copyright subsisted in a recording on
1 January 2005, the longer term of copyright applied to recordings whose term
commenced under the 1911 Act in the same way as it applied to recordings
made after 1 May 1969. As a result of the reforms commencing on 1 January
2019, all sound recordings, whether made public or not, will enter the public
domain if made before 1 January 1955.

The 1911 Act had extended dramatic work protection to films in which the
“arrangement or acting form or the combination of incidents represented give
the work an original character”, where the author was the deviser of the film’s
scenario.*® All films, including non-dramatic films (such as newsreel footage)
were also protected insofar as each film was conceived of as a series of photo-
graphs.” As such the respective term of protection under the 1911 Act was
life of the author plus 50 years for published dramatic films (an unpublished
dramatic film received an indefinite copyright term) and the lesser term of 50
years from making for non-dramatic films.“

The 1968 Act took a dual approach to transitioning films in which copy-
right subsisted immediately before 1 May 1969 into the 1968 Act's regime:
dramatic films were deemed to be protected as if they were dramatic works
under the 1968 Act and non-dramatic films were deemed to be protected as
photographic artistic works under the 1968 Act. Therefore, Part II published
dramatic work film copyright subsisting on 1 January 2005 was extended by 20
years, and published photographic artistic work film copyright subsisting on
1 January 2005 received the particularly steep increase to life of the author plus
70 years.“ Similarly the 1 January 2019 copyright consequences for dramatic
films are those of dramatic works, and the consequences for non-dramatic films
are those of artistic works.

4.9.2 Term duration of broadcasts — television and sound

Unlike sound recording and cinematograph films, sound and television
broadcasts received no prior recognition under the 1911 Act. Also, the public
nature of the subject matter means the issue of protection for “unpublished”
broadcasts simply does not arise. The first broadcast copyright subsistence
began from 1 May 1969: neither a broadcast made before that date nor any
subsequent repetition of such a broadcast attracts copyright subsistence.
Term duration as first enacted has not been changed - it has remained 50 years

after the expiration of the calendar year in which the broadcast was made.**
The broadcast repetition of a prior broadcast in which copyright subsists under
the 1968 Act confers no fresh term of protection, and the later broadcast either
takes the term of that earlier or, if the earlier broadcast’s term has expired,
copyright does not subsist in the later repeat.

4.9.3 Term duration of published editions

Similar to sound and television broadcasts, published editions received no
prior recognition under the 1911 Act and their nature means no issues arise
around protection of any (oxymoronic) “unpublished” published edition. Part
IV copyright only subsists in editions published after 1 May 1969.” The term
as first enacted has not been changed - it has remained 25 years after the
expiration of the calendar year in which the edition was first published.

410 — Term of Crown copyright

As discussed earlier in this chapter there are two situations where the 1968
Act vest initial ownership in the Crown in right of Commonwealth or State:
(i) when a work, sound recording or cinematograph film is made by or under
the direction or control of the Crown (Crown-made); and (ii) when a work is
first published in Australia by or under the direction or control of the Crown
(Crown-published).” In both situations s 179 specifically provides for the
ownership position in relation to subject matter that is Crown-made or Crown-
published to be modified by agreement and to vest it in either the author of the
work, the maker of the recording or film, or some other person."

Since 1 January 2019 the copyright term of all works, recordings and films
that are Crown-made or Crown-published (regardless of whether any assign-
ment of ownership has occurred under s 179) or are owned by the Crown
howsoever (e.g. by assignment), have under s 180 a uniform term of copyright
until 50 years after the calendar year in which the subject matter was made.**
This restrictive term raises a few points, including:

¢ It is unclear how the provision complies with art 17.4(4) of the
US-Australia Free Trade Agreement 2004.

* It seems that an assignment of third-party copyright to the Crown in
relation to works, recording or films that were made more than 50
years ago but still within the standard copyright term would cause
that copyright to cease on assignment, and if it were then on-assigned
to a non-Crown third party within the standard term the copyright
might re-enliven.

* Its unclear how the provision applies to the copyright term of works,
recordings or films co-owned by the Crown and another person, such
as sound recordings made by the Crown of a third-party performer or
pursuant to a public-private partnering that vests copyright in both
Crown and the private entity.

+ Itappears that those who have moral rights in relation to subject matter
to which s 180 applies have those rights cut short by the earlier than
usual cessation of copyright.”

These seem on their face to be issues worthy of some public policy considera-
tion - and perhaps should receive legislative clarification before some hapless
litigant encounters them. If the CLRC’s 2005 recommendations were adopted
to abolish the special provisions providing for Crown ownership rules and to
amend s 35(6) to better cater for the Crown, arguably these special term rules
that are dislocated from the norms should be reconsidered. Indeed, in an era
where options such as open source and Creative Commons voluntary licensing
of publicly funded material are available, it might be questioned whether the
many issues presented by the s 180 restrictive term are justified.

411. Term of international organizations’ copyright

As noted above works, sound recordings and cinematograph films first made
or published by declared international organizations are treated from an
ownership perspective in a manner equivalent to the Crown.™ However, this
subject matter receives more generous term duration provisions than Crown
copyright insofar as it adheres to the art 17.4(4) minimum standards of the
US-Australia Free Trade Agreement 2004. For copyright that subsists in
works, recordings and films covered by the international organizations owner-
ship provisions, since 1 January 2019 the term of copyright is a fixed term of

70 years from making, unless made public within 50 years from that making
in which case the term is 70 years after the calendar year in which the material
was first made public. For those works, recordings and films made public
prior to 1 January 2019, their term is 70 years after the calendar year in which
they were first made public.*”

