51 Introduction

In proprietary copyright there exist two major linkages between subsisting
subject matter and the bundle of exclusive rights attached to that subject
matter: derivation and substantial part. Derivation refers to the fundament
of copyright that there must be some form of “but for” factual connection
to particular subject matter for there to be an exercise of any of its exclusive
tights. Substantial part refers to the requirement, referenced in s 14(1) of the
1968 Act but having a foundation in case law that the exercise of any exclusive
right must occur in relation to at least a substantial part of the subject matter
in question. Both derivation and substantial part are required for copyright to
be exercised or infringed.

5.2 Derivation

The requirement to establish derivation from (alternatively termed “actual
use of”, “copying from” or “causal connection with”) a plaintiff's subject
matter is a defining feature of copyright liability that exists internationally
and distinguishes copyright from registered intellectual property rights where
no such requirement typically applies. Thus a registered patent right in this
sense is a stricter form of property than a right in copyright because in patent
law independent invention by a third party is not a defence to infringement of
valid patent claims. While derivation must exist for any exercise of copyright
to occur, in practice it is usually only in issue for Part III works rather than for
Part IV subject matter. This is because the more restricted nature of Part IV

property (set out in Chapter 3) effectively requires takings to be with mechani-
cal or technical exactitude to comprise a taking of any expression. Logically,
because the Part IV regime first requires having to take actual images or actual
sounds or a “facsimile copy” of an edition, once that is established by the
plaintiff as a matter of proof, not much meaningful forensic room exists for the
defendant to establish an absence of derivation.’ Therefore, derivation case law
to date involves only Part III works where infringement by taking expression
can occur without exactitude. In Part III settings it is more plausible that the
defendant had not copied, but rather had independently created and, as a
matter of pure coincidence, arrived at something resembling the plaintiff's
work. If so, it is a complete defence to copyright infringement.

5.24 A separate threshold requirement

The issue of whether the alleged infringement was caused in fact by copying
from the plaintiff's subject matter (derivation) is not the same as the issue of
whether, once such copying has been established, a substantial part of the
copyright subject matter has been taken? Derivation is a factual requirement
with a binary logic - it either exists or not - as opposed to substantial part
which is assessed in a more nuanced way by an evaluation of the quality and
quantity of what has been taken.’ The binary logic of derivation assessments
can present challenges for plaintiffs in cases involving computer programs. In
Dais Studios discussed in Chapter 2 (see: 2.5.2.4) Jessup J had found that two
sub-programs within a content management system (CMS) were computer
program literary works: the table file and the editor file. However, the plaintiff
had put its case on the basis that these works were within a particular iteration
of that CMS; those within the HR Advantage CMS. Given this, Jessup J could
not find that the defendant, a Mr Petro, had derived the alleged infringing
material from the HR Advantage CMS:
In the context of the present case, what is required for Dais to succeed is
that Mr Petro copied the HR Advantage CMS, or the table and editor files
from that CMS. It will not be sufficient if what Mr Petro copied was another
CMS (or the relevant files from another CMS) not itself a copy of the HR
Advantage CMS, even if that other CMS was a progenitor work from which
the HR Advantage CMS was derived+
It could not be established forensically that the table file’s or the editor file’s
provenance was the HR Advantage CMS and, on that ground alone, the plain-
tiff’s case failed. (The court accepted that if wrong on derivation, the defendant
had clearly taken the whole of those two files and the plaintiff's claim “must
succeed” 5) While this is an overtly rigid and perhaps questionable approach

to derivation, it also serves as a warning to copyright plaintiffs. The defend-
ant's infringing acts must be shown to have been derived from the particular
work that is pleaded: “[iJt is not sufficient that the putative infringer made a
copy of a progenitor, or a sibling, of the copyright work” .° In Dais Studios had
the so-called “progenitor” table and editor files been pleaded as their own
works, independent of the HR Advantage CMS, and assuming title could be
established, it seems more likely that the plaintiff's infringement claim would
have succeeded.

Derivation does not impose any element of intent or even consciousness.
So that a US court famously found that George Harrison had infringed copy-
right when he subconsciously derived the musical work My Sweet Lord froma
prior work: “his subconscious knew [that a particular combination of musical
sounds] already had worked in a song his conscious mind did not remember”.”
Similarly, in Francis Day & Hunter Ltd v Bron the UK Court of Appeal had
accepted that all that mattered was the existence of a causal connection and
that it was “quite irrelevant to inquire whether the defendant was or was not
consciously aware of such causal connection” .* More recently the UK Court of
Appeal has said emphatically in litigation involving The Da Vinci Code novel
that “[b]reach of copyright does not depend on intention or knowledge”?
Although as explained in Chapter 14 (see: 14.6.4) the flagrancy of the infringe-
ment might open the door to additional damages. Also, as explained below
(see: 5.3.2) in IceTV the Gummow-led opinion has expressed a view that the
presence or absence of any defendant animus furandi was relevant in finely-
balanced cases on assessments of whether a taking is a substantial part.

Asa practical matter, a decision to plead absence of factual derivation and
to assert independent creation on the part of the defendant carries some risk in
copyright litigation. In particular a metaphorical “black hat” could be put ona
party who unsuccessfully pleads no-derivation, and this in turn might impact
upon the court's disposition of a range of other matters such as remedies
and costs.!° Moreover, there are legal consequences for the availability of
other defences if the “no derivation” position fails. To give one example, the
defendant who pleads independent creation and no causal connection with
the plaintiff's work could not, logically, plead in the alternative that the use
of the plaintiffs work was done for the fair dealing purposes of illustrating a
critique of the work or for targeting parody at the work."

5.2.2 The use of inferences

Because of problems of proof confronting a plaintiff on establishing deriva-
tion when it is put in issue by a defendant, copyright law has developed an
evidentiary sub-rule. Once the plaintiff establishes: (i) objective similarities
between the defendant's alleged infringement and the plaintiffs work; and (ii)
the likelihood of the defendant having been able to avail itself of the plaintiff's
work, an inference of derivation can arise, and the onus shifts to the defendant
to establish independent creation to rebut it. Jacobs J has expressed it thus:
To prove copying the plaintiff can normally do no more than point to bits
of his work and the defendant's work which are the same and prove an
opportunity of access to his work. If the resemblance is sufficiently great
then the court will draw an inference of copying. It may then be possible
for the defendant to rebut the inference - to explain the similarities in some
other way.”

As to similarities, Hoffmann J has observed that: “It is the resemblances in
inessentials, the small, redundant, even mistaken elements of the copyright
work which carry the greatest weight ... because they are least likely to have
been the result of independent design.”

How can a defendant rebut the inference of derivation? Jacobs J goes
on - in dicta cited favourably by the Australian Full Federal Court in Pacific
Gaming v Aristocrat - to explain that a defendant could do this by establishing
that the parties “derived the similar bits from some third party or material
in the public domain” or that “the similarity arises out of a functional neces-
sity — that anyone doing this particular job would be likely to come up with
similar bits”.

5.2.3 Indirect causal connection

Derivation may be readily satisfied through some transmission of the expres-
sion of the plaintiff's work to the defendant via a roundabout or intermediate
means. The critical element is that the expression of the plaintiff's work dictates
the form of any intermediate from which the defendant copies. A person watch-
ing a dramatic work, being a play, performed on stage might make a record or
transcript of the performance, and will thereby reproduce the dramatic work
that is the play without ever having access to any written script. Derivation is
clearly satisfied if the performance is dictated by such a script.5 Likewise, an
artistic work being a blueprint drawing of a three-dimensional widget, that
is then mass produced and sold to the public, might dictate the form of the
widget. No copyright is likely to subsist in the widget per se. However, if a

third person reverse engineers the form of the widget to produce a competing
product, that person could infringe the artistic work copyright in the under-
lying blueprint drawing both: (i) by making its own blueprint as part of its
manufacturing exercise (so-called “ plan-to-plan” copying which is really more
accurately described as “plan-to-product-to-plan”), and also, (ii) by its own
three-dimensional competing widget copies.**

The difficulty arises in cases where the expression of the plaintiff's work
has not dictated the form of the thing alleged to be the transmission means.
This occurred in the UK case of Autospin (Oil Seals) v Beehive Spinning where
Laddie J had before him plaintiff drawings used for marketing purposes, made
after the manufacture of a particular component, that were alleged to have been
infringed by the defendant's copying of the component. Because the drawings
were marketing material made post-manufacture and not blueprint drawings
for the component (the blueprints, if any existed, were not in evidence) the
copyright claim in relation to them was doomed: there was “no chain of causa-
tion leading back from’ the defendant's copy components to a plaintiff-owned
artistic work that had dictated the form of the plaintiff’s component.”

5.2.4 Prior and distinct information separately reported in a
work

A complex and important issue is where the alleged infringement is said to be
derived not from the plaintiff's work, but from underlying prior information
that the plaintiff's copyright work to merely reports. In Purefoy Engineering
v Sykes Boxal the plaintiff alleged that its product catalogue was a literary
work that had been infringed by a competitor producing a similar catalogue
featuring the same products. The plaintiff's counsel in Purefoy Engineering had
sought to rely upon the late 19th century case of Hanfstaengl v Empire Palace
where it was accepted that derivation could be satisfied where sketches were
made of a tableau vivant representing the plaintiff's paintings. At the time of
Hanfstaengl v Empire Palace it was in vogue in the era to publicly exhibit tableau
vivants ona theatre stage set to recreate in three-dimensions a painted work of
visual art, with people standing still, posed on the stage, costumed and made
up to resemble figures in the painting. A type of frozen, artistic cosplay. So
that when an artist was concerned about sketches being made of a publicly

exhibited tableau vivants that had recreated the artist’s paintings, it was stated
that:
Although, therefore, these sketches are made from something in which there
is no copyright and although they represent something which is not itself
an infringement of the plaintiff's copyright, yet I am not prepared to say, as
a matter of law, that these sketches might not infringe the plaintiff's rights
if they could fairly be regarded as reproductions of his pictures.”
The Court of Appeal in Purefoy Engineering distinguished Hanfstaengl v Empire
Palace on the basis that in it the plaintiff's artistic copyright work dictated the
form of the non-copyright intermediate transmission means (ie. the tableau
vivants) whereas in Purefoy Engineering the Purefoy catalogue’s form was
dictated by essentially non-copyright matter - ie. a prior selection of goods
to offer for sale:
In our judgment, [plaintiff counsel's] argument involves the transposition
of an essential sequence in the chain. For, in our judgment, it is not true to
say that the parts made and offered by the Plaintiffs ‘represented’ in physi-
cal form the descriptions in the catalogues - at least in any sense relevant
to the consideration of copyright in the latter, as a literary work. Rather,
the contents of the catalogue described the parts made and offered by the
Plaintiffs. And the considerable skill and labour devoted by the Plaintiffs in
making their selection was devoted to the selection of the range of goods in
which the Plaintiffs were to trade and not for the purpose of bringing into
existence the literary work, namely, the catalogue.”
The original expression of the plaintiff's catalogue as a literary work did not
dictate the products to be offered for sale by the plaintiff. Rather, it was the
other way around. The plaintiff’s catalogue was a record of the competitive
trading choices previously made by the plaintiff, and those choices being non-
authorial could not be protected in copyright. Any third party could compete
by offering the same goods without infringing the plaintiff's literary copyright.
This was because that offering was not derived from the plaintiff's catalogue’s
relevant expression, but rather from the plaintiff's prior trading choices that
the catalogue merely recorded.

Purefoy Engineering's holding is a conceptually difficult one. Copinger and
Skone James adroitly explain that the skill and labour which had been copied
by the defendant was “that which had gone into selecting the parts and not
into compiling the catalogue”. In other words that selection was a purely
mercantile one, too dislocated from the subsequent literary work, to count
towards the work’s originality.” It was not a type of mental effort properly

protected in copyright. As will be explained below (see: 5.3.2) the French-led
opinion in IceTV can be understood within the logic of Purefoy Engineering.
However, it leads to some difficult (and yet to be satisfactorily resolved) issues
relating to many types of information-based works. For example, maps which
were protected as compilation-type literary works under the 1911 Act and
since the 1968 Act have been categorised as artistic works. The natural or built
geography depicted in a map can be understood as prior and distinct informa-
tion separately reported in a work. Can a third-party map maker avail itself
of that reported information in making its own map (but without taking the
pioneer map makers aesthetic choices of colour schemes, symbols and the like)
and make a Purefoy Engineering argument to negate derivation? Or should the
philosophy of 1 Valter v Lane apply and obliged the third-party map maker to
undertake its own survey?

5.3 Substantial part

The other legal juncture of Australian copyright law which connects subject
matter to exclusive rights, is the substantial part test. As will be seen, the test
emerged in 19th century case law relating to musical works and emerged in
codified form in 1911 as a general rule applicable to the exercise of all copyright
exclusive rights. Its re-codified form in the 1968 regime - where it is in a deem-
ing provision - tends to belie the continued centrality of the substantial part
test in modern law.

5.3.1 Origins and role of the concept

In the 1835 case of D’Almaine v Boosey Abinger CB of the Court of Exchequer
had before him the question of whether the music of the opera Lestocq had been
reproduced by the defendant who had published “several of the airs of Lestocq,
with some alterations, in the shape of quadrilles and waltzes”. Abinger CB
noted that the bars of a musical work might be taken by a defendant “in a
different order or broken by the intersection of others ... in such a manner as
should not be a piracy”. Conversely infringement might arise when “the air
taken is substantially the same with the original” and “the mere adaptation of
the air, either by changing it to a dance or by transferring it from one instru-
ment to another, does not, even to common apprehensions, alter the original
subject”. Restating this principle, and finding infringement in the case before
him, Abinger CB held that “substantially the piracy is where the appropriated
music, though adapted to a different purpose from that of the original, may
still be recognised by the ear”.* Thus, it was in this context of musical work
infringement in 1835 that early contours of the modern substantial part test

could be observed. Prior to 1911 the concept was applied in the 1872 case of
Bradbury v Hotten involving infringement of artwork in Punch magazine. Pigott
B could pithily state that “the question is, whether a substantial part of the
plaintiffs’ publication has been appropriated” .” Likewise, in 1875 Brett J could
state in Chatterton v Cave - a case involving dramatic work infringement - that
“unless there is a taking of a material and substantial part there is no infringe-
ment of copyright”.

Chatterton v Cave involved s 2 of the Dramatic Copyright Act 1833 which
provided for minimum statutory damage of 40 shillings for every unauthor-
ised production of an author's dramatic work, “or any part” of such a work.
Thus, the statutory text “any part” was given a judicial gloss in Chatterton 0
Cave: any material and substantial part. This type of approach became codified
as something which went to the very essence of copyright property. Thus
in the 1911 Act copyright was defined to mean “the sole right to produce
or reproduce the work or any substantial part thereof in any material form
whatsoever, to perform, or in the case of a lecture to deliver, the work or any
substantial part thereof in public; if the work is unpublished, to publish the
work or any substantial part thereof” .” In the 1956 Act, the central concept that
copyright protects something less than whole takings of subject matter was
consigned in the legislative scheme within a deeming provision. It provided as
a general rule that “any reference in this Act to the doing of an act in relation
to a work or other subject matter shall be taken to include a reference to the
doing of that act in relation to a substantial part thereof” » Such a provision
was accepted by the Spicer Committee and since enactment the 1968 Act has
comprised (without subsequent amendment) s 14(1)(a) straddling Part III
works and Part IV other subject matter.

5.3.2 Modern approach to substantial part for Part Ill works

The modern Australian law starting point to substantial part is Mason CJ's
dissent in Autodesk v Dyason (No 2). It will be recalled from Chapter 2
(see: 2.5.2.2) that when the case returned to the High Court Mason CJ intimated
his view that the look-up table was unlikely to comprise a substantial part of
the Widget C subprogram. In arriving at that position, Mason CJ referenced
into his opinion a statement by Lord Pearce from William Hill (Football) »
Ladbroke (Football).**

William Hill (Football) v Ladbroke (Football) is a finely balanced UK case
from the early 1960s. Liability was found for substantial part infringement (by
reproduction) of the plaintiff's literary work: a fixed-odd betting coupon. A
majority of the Court of Appeal and a unanimous House of Lords concluded
that copyright subsisted in the coupon as a literary work table or compilation.
Denning MR emphasised its lay-out as “a most skilled piece of work” insofar
as it was “remarkable” that [the plaintiff] had accommodated all their betting
lists “in so convenient a compass with all the necessary letterpress” ** Also
identified by Denning MR was the selection by the plaintiff of the 16 fixed-odd
bet type lists, a selection “likely to be the most attractive to punters and not
unduly hazardous to [the plaintiff]”, and which “needed a great deal of skill,
labour and money” .*° Lord Pearce too identified that the “arrangement and
contents” of such betting coupons was central to a betting agency’s business
and that the plaintiff had “devoted much work and money and ingenuity”:

Out of the vast number of bets that can be offered, they select and devise
those which, while being profitable to them, will fill the coupon with the
greatest allure.*°
The defendants, in turn, were found to have taken 15 out of those 16 bet
types and to have also taken the arranged form of the plaintiff’s coupon. The
defendant's primary argument against a finding of a substantial part taking
was essentially founded upon the reasoning applied in Purefoy Engineering v
Sykes Boxal: the effort of the plaintiff was of such a mercantile and non-literary
type, that it could not count towards the originality of the plaintiff coupon,
and thus it was open to lawful appropriation.” This argument found favour
with the trial judge and Diplock LJ who dissented in the Court of Appeal.
Diplock LJ stated:
But any skill and labour involved in the choice of these particular types
of wagers was exercised in reaching the decision to do business in these
types of wagers and in my view was rightly excluded by the learned judge
in considering whether the coupon was entitled to literary copyright as
a compilation - just as in the case of any mere list or catalogue of goods
which a trader decides to offer for sale, any skill or labour involved in
the decision to do business in those particular goods must be excluded in
determining whether the list or catalogue is entitled to literary copyright
as a compilation.
The passage from Lord Pearce in the House of Lords - that Mason CJ inscribed
into his Autodesk (No 2) dissent - was clearly put very much in answer to
Diplock L]’s Purefoy Engineering based reasoning:
Whether a part is substantial must be decided by its quality rather than its
quantity. The reproduction of a part which by itself has no originality will

not normally be a substantial part of the copyright and therefore will not be
protected. For that which would not attract copyright except by reason of its
collocation will, when robbed of that collocation, not be a substantial part
of the copyright and therefore the courts will not hold its reproduction to
be an infringement. It is this, I think, which is meant by one or two judicial
observations that ‘there is no copyright’ in some unoriginal part of a whole
that is copyright”
This brings into sharp focus the nature and quantum of the originality sustain-
ing any work. It is this alone that is used in law to assess the substantiality of
what the defendant has taken. Substantial part cannot be determined without
first determining the nature and quantum of originality. Here both the selec-
tion of bets and their layout as an aspect of the coupon were regarded by the
House of Lords as comprising relevant originality and the defendant had taken
a substantial part of that originality.

The Mason CJ dissent, and therefore Lord Pearce’s quoted dicta, emerged
as central to Australian law after the High Court's decision in Data Access v
Powerflex.*° There Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ expressed
strong support for the Mason CJ Autodesk No 2 dissent, inscribing a lengthy
passage from that dissent, including Lord Pearce’s dicta, into their opinion.*
The joint judgment went on to state: “We prefer Mason CJ's opinion that, in
determining whether something is a substantial part of a computer program,
the ‘essential or material features [of the computer program] should be ascer-
tained by considering the originality of the part allegedly taken”? Consistent
with that, the High Court in Data Access v Powerflex identified as explained
in Chapter 2 (see: 2.5.2.3) that the originality of computer programs resided
in the structural logic of sets of instructions to a processing device and that
each so-called “Reserved Word” (command) taken by the defendant was not
a set of instructions, and therefore could not comprise a taking of the work's
originality. Moreover, the court held that “even when the Reserved Words are
considered as a collocation, they do not possess sufficient originality as data to
constitute a substantial part of the computer program which is the [plaintiff's]
system”.

The issue of substantial part came before the High Court in IceTV, in which
there were two distinct methodological approaches. The Gummow-led opinion
(comprising Gummow, Hayne and Heydon J) adhered more closely to the way
in which substantial part had evolved. The French-led opinion (comprising
French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ) was a more distinct methodology, and could.
be understood as having a kinship with a line of US merger cases that follow
an infringement model: the taking from any original work of pre-existing facts
(i.e. information which does not originate in human authorship) will never

amount to a substantial part. Ultimately, in the context of the Lord Pearce
dicta from 1Villiam Hill (Football) v Ladbroke (Football), the two approaches are
capable of a degree of harmonisation.

Early in the Gummow-led opinion treatment of substantial part in IceTV the
observation was made that “the statutory requirement that the part of a work
taken must be substantial assumes there may be some measure of legitimate
appropriation” .* As explained in Chapter 2 (see: 2.5.1.2), the relevant work
was a five-columned weekly schedule in Excel and text format that had been
transmitted to third-party publishers for licensed reproduction and commu-
nication. Rather than initially copying from a licensed publisher's guide, the
trial judge had found that in constructing its own electronic program guide (the
“IceGuide”) a template of the program schedule had been first produced by an
employee of the defendant going through the “torture” of watching a week’s
programming of the plaintiff broadcaster and manually listing programs by
time and title. Only after then had the defendant used licensed third-party
publications to update that schedule from week to week and produce its
IceGuide. The Full Federal Court had observed that the defendant “made 17
changes to 31 timeslots in the final IceGuide for Saturday 23 September 2006 and
approximately 12 or 13 changes to 29 timeslots for Monday, 2 October 2005” *”
The issue resolved to whether those updates to the time and title information
taken week to week by the defendant amounted to a substantial part of the
originality of the five-columned weekly schedule for any given week. The Full
Federal Court had found that this amounted to a substantial part: the changes
from week to week were “precisely the pieces of information that reflected the
exercise of skill and labour by [the plaintiff] in determining the program for a
particular day” and the defendant had thus “appropriated the most creative
elements of the skill and labour” utilised by the plaintiff.

In contrast “slivers of information” was how trial judge Bennett J had
characterised the defendant's takings, when arriving at her holding that those
takings did not comprise a substantial part.” The Gummow-led opinion
criticised the Full Court's approach, stating that it “approached the issue
of substantiality at too high a level of abstraction” and considered that the
result arrived at by the trial judge was correct.” This was in the context of
the Gummow-led opinion’s earlier holding explained in Chapter 2 (see: 2.9.2)
that no finding could be made that the five-columned weekly schedule was
a work of joint authorship. As such, its originality lay not in the provision of

time and title information, but merely in “the selection and presentation of that
information together with additional programme information and synopses,
to produce a composite whole”. In relation to the weekly updates made by
the defendant, the Gammow-led opinion concluded that the plaintiff had not
established these were a substantial part taking by the defendant of that origi-
nality when assessed against the five-columned weekly schedule as a whole.**
It buttressed that conclusion by observing that “in assessing the quality of
the time and title information, as components of the [five-columned weekly
schedule], baldly stated matters of fact or intention are inseparable from and
co-extensive with their expression” .* This issue was central to the French-led
opinion’s analysis, discussed next. The Gummow-led opinion also buttressed
its conclusion of no substantial part taking by the defendant's lack of animus
furandi, evidenced by the way in which it had somewhat reverse-engineered
the plaintiff's schedule and the fact that it had augmented its IceGuide with
its own (sometimes irreverent) program synopses.*

The French-led opinion proceeded by accepting that the plaintiffs work -
which it conceived of as being either the five-columned weekly schedule or an
underlying database “ presumably from week to week” of scheduled programs
-as a whole involved an “orderly arrangement of its various elements and the
evidence showed choices were made about what programmes were included
or excluded”. As such it was “an original (i.e. not copied) collocation of both
information and creative material” ** However, on the French-led opinion’s
view, the extracting from that literary work (in the manner done by the defend-
ant) of items of time and title information could never comprise a substantial
part taking. That was because, on the French-led opinion’s view: “the expres-
sion of the time and title information, in respect of each programme, is not a
form of expression which requires particular mental effort or exertion” It
went on to observe that the way in which such information can be expressed
“was essentially dictated by the nature of the information” .* Critically, prior
to arriving at this conclusion the French-led opinion inscribed Lord Pearce’s
dicta from VVilliam Hill (Football) v Ladbroke (Football). It will be recalled this
had likewise been inscribed by Mason CJ into his influential Autodesk (No 2)
dissent. The dicta had been put by Lord Pearce largely in answer to Diplock
LJ's Purefoy Engineering based reasoning in the VVilliam Hill Court of Appeal.
The French-led opinion emphasised the point that the “reproduction of a part
which by itself has no originality will not normally be a substantial part of the
copyright and therefore will not be protected”.

The Gummow-led and the French-led opinions arrive at the same
conclusion on infringement by subtly different routes. Those routes are not
inconsistent, but they lay emphasis on different things. The former looked to
the thin nature of the ori; ity sustaining the five-columned weekly schedule
contained in the excel or text files, and argued that the item-by-item updating
of time and title information by the defendant could not be a substantial part
of that originality. In buttressing its conclusion, it pointed to how the nature of
the information taken (“baldly stated matters of fact or intention”) dictated its
expression and the absence in the defendant of animus furandi. The French-led
opinion was less concerned with the identity or nature of the work in issue: it
mattered not whether it was the five-columned weekly schedule or an underly-
ing database. What mattered was what was taken, and the French-led opinion
conceived that as expression dictated by the information.

Asa matter of approach, the Gummow-led opinion in IceTV is more ortho-
dox. The French-led opinion in IceTV arguably omits a critical aspect in its
reasoning that would connect it explicitly to the Purefoy Engineering holding on
derivation. Quite clearly, a broadcaster's program schedule is “information” in
the same way that a novel by J K Rowling is information. What differentiates
the two is not their status as “information” but the fact that J K Rowling’s
words are chosen to create literary works, whereas the broadcaster’s schedule
is arecord of programs chosen for commercial reasons and “not for the purpose
of bringing into existence the literary work”. The French-led opinion can be
explained within the conceptually difficult rubric of derivation as holding that:
(i) where the form of the original work in issue is dictated by information dislo-
cated from authorial concerns, and (ii) the defendant has merely taken that
information, then (iii) the taking cannot comprise a substantial part (or perhaps
even any part) of a work's originality. In the above discussion on derivation
and Purefoy Engineering the issue flagged in the example of map making (see:
5.2.4) is relevant here. It was observed that the geography depicted in a map
can be understood as prior and distinct factual information that is separately
reported in a work. Should a third-party map maker be lawfully able to take
that reported information in making its own map (expressed in its own artistic
expression) or should the philosophy of Walter v Lane apply which would
oblige the third-party map maker undertake its own survey itself? IceTV
suggests that the Gummow-led opinion of copyright might only protect the
particular artistic form of expression of the plaintiff's map, originating from
those identified responsible human authors, whom the plaintiff derives its
title. IceTV also suggests that under the French-led opinion, a defendant taking
merely the reported geographic information that existed prior to the work
might never amount to a substantial part of the originality in the work. Both
approaches lead to the same outcome as they did in IceT V itself: in cases where
the work in essence reports prior information not originating from the author,
only takings which appropriate more or less the exact form of the report are
likely to comprise a substantial part of its originality.

While IceTV is a difficult case, it is apt to conclude this discussion by
returning to Bennett J and her application of the substantial part test by way
of obiter in Fairfax Media Publications v Reed International Books Australia in
answering a far simpler question: if a newspaper article and its headline were
a unitary literary work, would the taking of the headline alone comprise a
substantial part? Justice Bennett’s answer was unambiguously no: “the head-
line has not been shown to be an original, and therefore, substantial part of
the work”.

5.3.3 Modern approach to substantial part for Part IV subject
matter

As noted above when introducing derivation, the more restricted nature of
Part IV property requires takings to be with a mechanical or technical exacti-
tude. The question has arisen whether that restricted nature of the property
has an impact on the way in which the substantial part test of s 14(1)(a) (which
applies to both “a work or other subject matter”) operates within Part IV.
The first occasion in Australian law in which the issue of substantial part
was considered at appellate level in relation to Part IV subject matter was
Nationwide News v CAL. As explained in Chapter 3 (see: 3.5) the position
established by Wilcox J at trial that published edition copyright subject matter
comprises the entirety of the typographical layout of an edition was not
challenged before the Full Court. The published editions were daily editions
of Australian newspapers, and the issue on appeal resolved to whether the
photocopying of individual articles (some period of time after publication
for the purpose of teaching) amounted to a substantial part of each edition.
Sackville J, writing for the Full Court, held that regard should be had to both
the quality and quantity of the taking:
In relation to a published edition, the quality of what is taken must be
assessed by reference to the interest protected by the copyright. That inter-
est, as has been seen, is in protecting the presentation and layout of the
edition, as distinct from the particular words or images published in the
edition. The quantity of the material reproduced, assessed by reference to
the whole of the published edition, is relevant in determining whether what
has been taken is a substantial part of the edition. But since it is the quality
of the material taken that is the key issue, the quantity is not the only, nor
necessarily the principal, criterion.
In assessing the quality of each individual taking, the court had regard to:

* The object of copying each article was not to utilise the typography,
layout or presentation, but rather to distribute the content of the articles
to students.

¢ It was not use by a competing publisher of a distinctive feature of
the layout or presentation for the purposes of a rival magazine or
newspaper.

* That in respect of a representative article before the court from The
Weekend Australian, it could not have been copied prior to the Monday
following its publication.

As such the court held that it was “difficult to conclude that there was any
significant interference with the publisher's commercial interest in the whole
published edition” which in turn strongly informed the conclusion (uphold-
ing the result at trial®) of no substantial part taking by the photocopying
of any individual article.“ In so holding, the Full Court (as did Wilcox J”)
expressly disapproved Walton J’s 1983 decision in Market Machinery » Sheen
Publishing that held that each article in a magazine, including each advertise-
ment, attracted published edition copyright so that any individual article
copying was a substantial part of the subject matter so conceived. Sackville J
for the Full Court observed that Market Machinery v Sheen Publishing had little
authority on the issue of substantial part “once the view is taken that no
separate published edition copyright exists in each article” .“’ However, the
Market Machinery v Sheen Publishing style of analysis was to re-emerge in the
Full Federal Court 10 years later in the only other appellate level considera-
tion of substantial part for Part IV subject-matter: the TCN Nine v Network 10
litigation discussed next.

Thus, aside from Nationwide News v CAL the other major litigation in which
the question of a substantial part taking of Part IV subject matter was consid-
ered is TCN Nine v Network 10. “The Panel” was a commercially successful
television program of the defendant. Its format involved a panel of comedic
commentators passing comment on segments taken from broadcasts in the
week or so prior. The plaintiff owned copyright in many of the television
broadcasts segments from which were included in “The Panel” and sued to
prevent such ongoing use. As explained in Chapter 3 (see: 3.4) the High Court
decision in the case defined the meaning of what is a television broadcast in
a pragmatic way.

On whether each segment comprised a substantial part of the plaintiff's
broadcasts Conti J at trial applied Nationwide News v CAL by observing “that
critical factors of quantity, quality, and object or purpose, do not operate in a
mutually exclusive way”.” Conti J went on to state that:

Inrelation to the dual tests of quantity and quality, issues must be resolved
as to whether harm has been inflicted on Nine’s commercial interest in the

whole of the program or program segment and whether Nine’s commercial
interest has been interfered with in terms of the nature, value and degree
of what has been taken.”

This distillation of the substantial part test led Conti J to conclude that without
commercial harm arising from the defendant's use, no substantial part could
be taken: “what was taken could be characterised as relatively de minimis, and
for at least the most part trivial, and was used by Ten for different objects or
purposes than those targeted by Nine, being in Ten’s case purposes essentially
of satire, light humour or light entertainment” ” This approach was seemingly
extrapolated from the concern in Nationwide News v CAL that substantial part
required a focus on “the interest protected by the copyright”.” In Conti J’s
analysis the protected interest in respect of television broadcast subject matter
resolved to protection from commercial harm. This harm-focused approach
was studiously ignored by the Full Court on the initial appeal in 2002 and
by the High Court in the further appeal. On remit to the Full Court in 2005,
the court was more forthright. Finkelstein J rejected that the principal inquiry
was “whether harm has been caused to the plaintiffs commercial interests” .”*
Similarly, Hely J in 2005 stated that the fact the defendant's use of the segments
was for a purpose quite different to the plaintiff's source broadcast said “little,
if anything, about whether those segments are a material part of the source
broadcast”.

Hely J’s judgment in the 2002 Full Court was an approach to substantial
part that was similar to that of Walton J in Market Machinery v Sheen Publishing.
Having identified that the “interest protected by the copyright is the visual
images broadcast by way of television and any accompanying sounds”, Hely J
explained his approach in the following terms:

[T]he first minute of transmission may be a television broadcast as much
as the first five minutes. If there is a re-broadcasting of the first minute
by one competitor and of the first five minutes by another, then each has
infringed the initial broadcaster's copyright in a television broadcast which
is of one minute’s duration in the first case, and of five minutes duration
in the second.”

The fact that every moment of transmission was its own television broadcast

was said by Hely J to “not lead to any inconvenience or absurdity” because of

the restricted nature of Part IV property was “confined to the actual images

and accompanying sounds broadcast”.” As for the substantial part test ins 14,

Hely J conceived this as having a limited role to play: if a broadcast consists of

visual images and sounds, but the one, rather than the other is taken, or if the

taking is of images which have been cropped, then issues of substantiality may
arise.” However, Hely J also went further and suggested that the substantial
test might indeed have no role to play for television broadcasts. This was that
because s 14 applies “unless the contrary intention appears”, a court should not
“approach the problem of identifying the interest protected by the copyright
on the basis that resolution of that problem should necessarily accommodate
s 14(1)”.” This sidelining of the s 14 substantial part test was emphatically
rejected by the High Court on appeal.

Thus, on appeal, the majority joint judgment of McHugh ACJ, Gummow
and Hayne JJ was critical of this approach by the Full Federal Court to substantial
part. It first observed the effect of the Full Court’s approach was “to go beyond
s 14(1) and provide that, with respect to any given period of broadcasting,
however brief, the copyright owner has the exclusive right to re-broadcast any
of the images and accompanying sounds broadcast” ® The joint judgment then
noted that it was “quite wrong to approach an infringement claim on the footing
that the question of the taking of a substantial part may be by-passed by going
directly to the fair dealing defences” * Having delivered this admonishment,
the High Court emphasised the universality and centrality of the substantial
part test to both Part III and Part IV of the Copyright Act:

[T]he requirement that an infringer who takes less than the whole of the
protected subject matter must take at least a substantial part thereof plays
a well-established and central part in copyright law. Questions of quality
(which could include the potency of particular images or sounds, or both,
ina broadcast) as well as quantity arise both in respect of Pt IV copyrights
and those copyrights in original works to which Pt III applies.
In making this statement the High Court majority referenced both the earlier
Full Court decision in Nationwide News v CAL and the similar House of Lords
decision in Newspaper Licensing v Marks & Spencer - both cases found no
substantial part taking of published edition copyright subsisting in a daily
newspaper by the copying an individual article from it.®* By this the High
Court underscored the harmonising nature of the substantial part test and
tacitly endorsed the outcomes in those two published edition cases. However,
the existence of a specific statutory provision which effectively deemed that
the taking of a single still image from a television broadcast could comprise
an exercise of an exclusive right was explained as applying only if it was a
particularly potent still image — and thus a substantial part of the broadcast.

The High Court ordered the remittal of the case back to the Full Court to
reconsider whether the segments taken from the plaintiff’s broadcasts were a
substantial part of those respective broadcasts, under its guidance explained
in Chapter 3 (see: 3.4) as to what television broadcast copyright subject matter
was. In the Full Court on this second occasion there was a division of opinion
as to the application of the substantial part test in respect of the so redefined
television broadcasts. The majority, Sundberg and Finkelstein JJ, considered
that six of the 11 segments before the court comprised a substantial part of
their broadcasts; whereas Hely J considered that only three of those six were
substantial. One of the three segments that the judges disagreed on involved
a few seconds of slow-motion footage of a celebratory cartwheel undertaken
by a footballer after a match. The majority considered it a substantial part in
these terms:

Ten copied eight seconds of the program. The footage of the Glen Lazarus
cartwheel was, on any view, a ‘highlight’. Mr Lazarus was a prop (affection-
ately known as ‘the brick with eyes’). He was playing his very last game of
rugby league and was able to celebrate it with a win in the 1999 grand final.

Hely J's analysis of the same footage was as follows:

[T]his Panel Segment takes a portion of Nine’s live broadcast of the
National Rugby League grand final. The particular portion taken features
one of the players, Mr Glen Lazarus, performing a cartwheel as part of
the post-match celebrations. He was not the only player to do so, and the
footage taken does not show that there were other players following suit
doing cartwheels of their own. The part taken is fleeting in character, and
is not in any sense a highlight of the broadcast. Even if it be accepted that
the original broadcast had as its subject matter both the grand final itself as
well as the post-match presentations, the footage taken was only incidental
to the source broadcast, and was trivial, inconsequential or insignificant in
terms of that broadcast.”

These respective treatments reveal that ultimately the substantial part test
was applied here more as a broad standard than a bright line rule and that
assessments of the “potency” of any taking vary in the minds of judges. Here,
the high level of subjectivity applied in the majority’s analysis of the cartwheel
might reasonably lead to some scepticism about its correctness — especially
when set against Hely J’s more detached approach.

5.3.4

Concluding propositions on substantial part

Substantial part as it applies to Part III and Part IV subject matter is a unify-
ing aspect of Australian copyright law. It is a metaphorical hip-joint which
connects Part III works and Part IV subject matter set out in Chapters 2 and 3
respectively with the copyright economic rights described next in Chapter 6.
It plays a like role elsewhere in the 1968 Act. As will be explained in Chapter
11 (see: 11.2.3) it does this in the context of the performers’ rights regime of
Part XIA. As will be explained in Chapter 12 (see: 12.4.2) it also does this in
the context of the moral rights regime of Part IX. However, the jurisprudence
on substantial part has been generated in the contexts of Part III and Part IV,
and from that four summary propositions can be made:

@

Q)

It is a relative assessment that requires specific identification of subject
matter. The cases across Part III and Part IV highlight that the first
step in assessing the substantial part test is identifying with specificity
the metes and bounds of the relevant subject matter from which the
part was taken. This first step, which can be confounding, can also
control the ultimate outcome of the test. Thus, in both Autodesk and
in IceTV there was genuine debate over the identification of the metes
and bounds of the Part III works in issue. In IceTV the Gummow-
led opinion’s answer to that question, in terms of the nature of the
work’s originality, largely dictated its disposition of the case. In both
Nationwide News v CAL and TCN Nine v Network 10 determining the
metes and bounds of the Part IV subject matter in issue was central to
the resolution of the cases.

The assessment is focused more on the form taken rather than the
substance taken. This proposition can be drawn from High Court
authorities of the past two decades. There has been a rejection in Part III
of protecting mere sweat of the brow of the I Valter v Lane variety. That
is, the Gummow-led opinion in IceTV expressly rejected the holding in
Desktop Marketing that had found substantial part takings of a work's
originality absent any formal resemblance between the work and
that which had been taken. In Data Access the taking of the substan-
tive functions of computing commands alone could not amount to
substantive part; rather the formal lines of code needed to be taken for
it to amount to any substantial part of the work. The McHugh ACJ,
Gummow and Hayne J] joint judgment in TCN Nine v Network 10 did
not expressly endorse the more fluid approach to substantial part in
Nationwide News v CAL which looked to first identify the “interest
protected by the copyright” and to then focus upon the quality of the
taking relative to that interest. Instead, under that TCN Nine v Network
10 joint judgment, an assessment should be made of the “potency” of
the taking relative to the Part IV subject matter as a whole. Implicit in
this, potency was assessed by eye and ear, and the approach led away
from matters of underlying substantive interests and towards (in that
case) audio-visual form.

(3) Broad proxy tests have been rejected. Surrogate tests for substantial

(4

part have been put forward but have not found favour in modern
Australian law. In University of London Press v University Tutorial Press
Peterson J put forward the dicta in 1916 in relation to literary works
that “what is worth copying is prima facie worth protecting” ®° This
plaintiff-favouring rule was expressly criticised by the Gummow-led
opinion in IceTV as having a “deceptive simplicity” which can lead to
trivial takings being characterised as substantial parts. This was an
outcome contrary to the preferred policy position of the High Court,
which has favoured greater freedom of users to exploit copyright at the
margins without implicating exclusive rights. In TCN Nine v Network
10 Conti J at trial suggested that for television broadcasts substantial
part issues must be resolved by reference to “whether harm has been
inflicted” by the defendant's use.” This defendant-favouring rule
has also been rejected: commercial harm of the use has little if any
relevance to the substantial part issue.

However, the focus on the form taken rather than the substance taken,
and the rejection of broad substitute tests does not mean that the assess-
ment of substantial part is unsympathetic to the nature of the source
subject matter appropriated. The approach to assessing substantial has
a plasticity to cater for different types of subject matter. For example,
with musical works the “recognisability” of the part taken as long ago
as 1835 emerged as an important consideration in infringement cases.”
Ina more recent example, the High Court has observed that the taking
of a substantial part of a cinematograph film in the form of the video
game might require its use as a video game.*

