TA Introduction

This chapter brings together legal principles established in earlier chapters,
while introducing new matter. It will first consider territoriality issues as they
relate to exclusive rights and infringement - issues of jurisdictional attach-
ment for the purpose of rights recognition are dealt with in Chapter 13. The
concept of direct infringement is briefly explained, building upon Chapters
2-6. Infringement by authorisation and its specific exceptions (in particular
those relating to carriage service providers) will next be considered followed
by infringement by dealings and its specific exceptions, in particular those for
parallel importation. The relatively new non-proprietary liability regime for
circumventing or removing technical measures will then be explained, with
joint tortfeasor and groundless threat liability concluding the chapter.

7.2 Territoriality
7.24 Generally

The territorial nature of copyright means that in general rights are conferred
on a territory-by-territory basis under each nation’s laws so that “protection
and the possibility of enforcing rights stops at the national borders”.’ As will

be explained in Chapter 13, when international systems of protection are
discussed, the basis upon which foreign copyright subject matter is largely
recognised as being under the jurisdiction of the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) is on
the implementation of national treatment principles. These are principles that
go to the very heart of the Berne Convention norms, norms which today form
an important pillar of World Trade Organization (TRIPS) principles governing
world economic relations. However, national treatment principles can also be
understood as an attempt at creating a global patchwork quilt of national rights
which arise from the constraints of territoriality.

Territoriality, therefore, means that the geographic reach of exclusive
rights typically is confined to national boundaries. When first enacted the
1968 Act provided in s 4 that “[tJhis Act extends to every Territory of the
Commonwealth not forming part of the Commonwealth” and “ Australia” was
defined to include the Territories of the Commonwealth not forming part of the
Commonwealth.’ Section 4 was altered in 1973 to the current streamlined draft-
ing whereby the section now provides that “[t]his Act extends to every external
territory” and by definition “Australia includes the external territories” * Thus,
if a legal dispute were to arise from an alleged infringement of copyright in
(say) the Australian Antarctic Territory, the Copyright Act 1968 would apply
to it in the same way as it would if the exploitation occurred in Alice Springs.
However, if an alleged infringement were to occur beyond the limits of how
Australia is geographically defined in the 1968 Act, that infringement is of no
direct relevance to the 1968 Act.t Thus Miles CJ of the ACT Supreme Court
has observed:

[Ilf there were an infringement of copyright in the present case, it was an
infringement that took place outside Australia of a right, if there was one,
which subsisted outside Australia. The Copyright Act does not appear to
extend to such rights or to such infringements. The use of [a counterclaiming
defendant's] design took place, as was contemplated by all parties, in Fiji,
and the infringement, if there was an infringement, appears to have been
taken in Fiji or Vanuatu or both and in any event not in Australia.>

The point, which was made by Miles CJ “almost in passing”, is fundamental

to understanding the territorial physical limits upon the intangible rights of

copyright. As such if an exercise of copyright outside those limits is to be
relevant to an Australian court it will be in one of three ways discussed further
below: (i) through the recognition and enforcement of a foreign copyright judg-
ment (see: 7.2.2); (ii) the possibility that the Australian court will itself apply

foreign law (see: 7.2.3); and (iii) where those offshore activities have impact
within the Australian territory (see: 7.2.4).

7.2.2 The local enforcement of foreign copyright judgments

Notwithstanding its s 4 geographical limitations, the 1968 Act may have some
extra-territorial relevance under private international law principles when a
foreign copyright judgment is being enforced in Australia. Such enforcement
may occur in one of three ways: under the Foreign Judgments Act 1991 (Cth),
under the Trans-Tasman Proceedings Act 2010 (Cth) and at common law.

7.2.2.1 Foreign Judgments Act 1991

The Foreign Judgments Act permits the direct enforcement through Australian
courts by way of a registration procedure of money judgments from a
prescribed selection of national courts - mostly of Commonwealth countries
but also several continental European countries and other developed nations
such as the Republic of Korea and Japan. The inclusion of a country’s court
system within the Act is on the basis of reciprocity and notably no American
court system is included.’ The Act provides (inter alia) that a registration may
be set aside by an Australian court if the enforcement of the foreign judgment
“would be contrary to public policy” $ This is a loaded concept that might be
argued to permit the setting aside of a registration if a foreign copyright judg-
ment in some way could be characterised as repugnant to Australian copyright
principles. This has been suggested to apply only in those quite exceptional
cases where “the recognition should produce results in the recognising country
which cannot be reconciled with its public policy”? The authors of Nygh’s
Conflict of Laws in Australia endorse a view put by Whelan J that the offence
must be to some principle of Australian public policy “so sacrosanct as to
require its maintenance at all costs”.*° Left unresolved is whether a foreign
money judgment for copyright liability, in circumstances where manifestly no

such liability could exist under the 1968 Act, might result in that judgment’s
Australian registration being set aside as “contrary to public policy”.

7.2.2.2 Trans-Tasman Proceedings Act 2010

New Zealand judgments receive special treatment courtesy of the Trans-
Tasman Proceedings Act 2010 (Cth) which permits the Australian registration
for enforcement purposes of any judgment which is a “final and conclusive
judgment that is given in a civil proceeding by a New Zealand court”.2 In
general this extends to both money and non-money (e.g. for injunctive relief)
judgments. However, the issue of public policy discussed above in the context
of the Foreign Judgments Act persists under this Act: an Australian court here
“must” set aside the registration of a New Zealand judgment if “the court is
satisfied that enforcement of the judgment would be contrary to public policy
in Australia” 5

7.2.2.3. Common law

Enforcement of foreign judgments outside the scope of the Foreign Judgments
Act and the Trans-Tasman Proceedings Act falls to the common law. So that civil
judgments from countries such as America, China (except Hong Kong) and
Spain can only be enforced at common law because they are outside a statutory
registration scheme. To the extent this relates to copyright judgments four basic
conditions must exist: (i) the foreign court exercised jurisdiction recognised by
Australian (or local) courts; (ii) the foreign judgment is final and conclusive;
(iii) parties are identified; and (iv) the judgment is for a money sum.

In Lucasfilm » Ainsworth — discussed previously in the context of what is
sculpture for artistic work purposes - the UK defendants had sold chattels
to consumers in the USA by advertising online and transacting with them
via the defendant's webpage. After an ex parte hearing a Californian federal
court made a monetary award against the UK defendants, in part based on
infringement of US copyright.” Although, as will be explained next, the UK

Supreme Court accepted the existence of this copyright liability in the US (and
indeed reinstated the UK trial judge's injunction restraining the defendants
from targeting advertising or sending the specified articles to the US) both
the trial judge and the Court of Appeal denied enforcement of the US money
judgment as failing the first condition at common law. This denial was not a
matter before the UK Supreme Court. The Court of Appeal and trial judge both
concluded the first common law condition could not be satisfied by the UK
defendants’ sale of goods (transacted via the internet) into the USA. Such sales
did not amount to sufficient presence for the US courts to have jurisdiction
over the UK defendants. The Court of Appeal found that a “pre-Internet”
authority applied in the internet era with equal if not greater force, to compel
a holding that a vendor merely advertising or selling into a foreign territory
did not amount to the jurisdictional presence of the vendor in that territory.¥*
This was not a matter further considered by the UK Supreme Court on appeal.
It should be noted that the common law, long prior to the codified registra-
tion schemes, had formed a rule about denying the enforcement of foreign
judgments that are contrary to public policy. Having reviewed the Australian
case law on this point, the authors of Nygh’s Conflict of Laws in Australia summa-
rised its effect in terms that mirrored their distillation of the counterpart rule
under statute:
The trend of authority supports the proposition that the public policy
ground for refusal of enforcement should be narrowly confined. The fact
that Australian law would have produced a different result is in some
sense evidence that Australian law has a different ‘policy’ from the relevant
foreign law, but that should not be sufficient. The offence against public
policy should be profound before refusal to enforce is warranted. Anything
less comes close to a review of the merits of the decision.”
If this approach were applied in the context of foreign copyright judgments, it
would only be an exceptional judgment that would fall so foul of Australian
public policy as to lead an Australian court to deny its enforceability.*®

7.2.3 The local justiciability of foreign copyright claims

It has long been the mainstream view in Australia that foreign intellectual
property claims are non justiciable by local courts.” That view has arisen
largely as a result of a 1906 Australian High Court decision in Potter » Broken
Hill Proprietary Co Ltd (“Potter”) which rejected (in the era of colonial patents)
jurisdiction in Victorian courts over a claimed infringement in New South
Wales of a NSW-granted patent, where the defendant had put in issue the

validity of the patent. This rejection was based in part on an expansive view of
the general principle that underpins British South Africa Co v Cia de Mogambique
(“the Mocgambique rule”) which established a principle that precludes adjudica-
tion on foreign real property disputes and also on the act of state doctrine
which regards the acts of a foreign government (such as patent grants) in its
own territory as unreviewable

The 2011 decision of the UK Supreme Court in Lucasfilm v Ainsworth
involved a review of both the Mocambique rule and the Australian High Court's
decision in Potter, done in a setting that was expressly confined to foreign
intellectual property claims excluding “rights dependent on the grant ... of
a foreign state” and excluding claims where the validity of the foreign right
was in issue.” This resolves to a very narrow band of claims: the infringement
of unregistered foreign intellectual property where the only matter in issue is
infringement. In the Lucasfilm v Ainsworth litigation the plaintiffs were found
to have no actionable rights in UK copyright against the defendants because
the Star Wars helmets were not works of sculpture as discussed in Chapter 2
(see: 2.8.1.2). The plaintiffs were also found to be unable to enforce their US
monetary judgment against the defendants because the defendants had no
relevant presence in the US as discussed above (see: 7.2.2.3). However, the UK
Supreme Court unanimously held that the plaintiffs’ US copyright infringe-
ment claims were justiciable in UK courts against the UK-based defendants. In
so holding, the UK Supreme Court reversed on this issue a unanimous Court
of Appeal (which had relied inter alia on the Mogambique rule and Potter) and
reinstated the order of the trial judge. On this issue the trial judge had held that:

The appropriate vehicle for dealing with this ... is to my mind the modern
doctrine of fortum conveniens ... It will generally not be appropriate, within
that doctrine, for an English court to have to consider the sort of validity
and registration issues identified in Potter, for the reasons given above. The
application of the doctrine will therefore make sure that such cases are not
heard in the wrong place, and in terms of real validity points it is likely
that any court other than the courts of the territory of registration will be
the wrong place.
Accordingly both the trial judge and the UK Supreme Court applied US
copyright law and were satisfied that the “utilitarian” product defence as it
existed in US copyright law was not open to the defendants on the facts, and
made or reinstated an order that enforced the plaintiffs’ US copyright against
the UK-based defendants. That court order restrained the defendants “from

advertising in any publication directed to the United States of America or
sending to the United States of America replicas of identified props, including
in particular the helmets” .» Thus, the UK court order based on US law was of
anon-monetary nature.

The persuasiveness of Lucasfilm v Ainsworth on Australian law is a matter
for future Australian jurisprudence. In 2002 a five-member judgment of the
High Court flagged that “[w]e ... would reserve for further consideration in
an appropriate case the Mocambique rule and the standing of Potter » BHP Co
Ltd”. Garnett wrote in 2009 that “[w]hile the Potter bar may be supported
where a substantial question is raised as to the validity of registered rights, itis
much less acceptable where non-registered rights are involved or the action is
purely for infringement” .” Another commentator, writing in 2012, asserted in
the wake of Lucasfilm v Ainsworth that it “illustrates that adjudication regarding
a foreign intellectual property interest that does not depend for its existence
upon registration is within the jurisdiction of an English or Australian court” >
If it is indeed the case that Australian courts do follow Lucasfilm v Ainsworth,
this will be seen in a new willingness of Australian courts to exercise juris-
diction - within the doctrine of forum conveniens - in infringement disputes
involving foreign copyright law. Significantly, and unlike the current scope
of enforcement possible under the Foreign Judgments Act, the exercise of such
jurisdiction would open the door, as was evident in Lucasfilin v Ainsworth itself,
to injunctive relief being ordered by an Australian court against Australian
defendants to restrain ongoing or future infringement under foreign copyright
law.

7.2.4 Offshore activities having local impacts: the transborder
exercise of rights

The third setting in which an Australian court might be called on to consider
actions occurring outside Australia are those which implicate the internet and
involve either offshore actors communicating subject matter or selling infring-
ing articles to a public in Australia, or conversely local actors communicating
subject matter or selling infringing articles to a public outside Australia.
While the issue arises most acutely for the communication to the public right
(discussed below) in certain respects where physical infringements are being
sold via the internet not dissimilar issues arise.

The removal of many intermediaries in commerce that the internet has
brought about has created prominent and novel issues in areas well beyond

copyright law. In Australian trade mark law, Merkel J in 1Vard Group v Bodie
& Stone dealt with the question of whether a UK-based online retailer used
a trade mark in Australia upon goods it was selling in circumstances where
Australia was listed on the website as a destination to which the products may
be shipped and an Australian dollar price was quoted as an indicative conver-
sion price. The trial judge, however, was not satisfied that those circumstances
indicated a specific intention that the particular goods in question were being
marketed to consumers in Australia without evidence of more specific target-
ing. Merkel J reasoned that the use of a trade mark on the internet, uploaded
ona website outside of Australia, without more, is not a use by the retailer of
the mark in each jurisdiction where the mark is rendered online. However,
if there is evidence that the use was specifically intended to be made in, or
directed or targeted at, a particular jurisdiction then there is likely to be a use
in that jurisdiction when the mark is rendered online.” Also, in the area of
consumption (sales) taxation, the expressions “Netflix tax” (in Australia for
online streaming services into the jurisdiction) and “Amazon tax” (in the US
for the retail sale of goods online across state borders) have arisen to describe
laws that strive to permit the collection of consumption taxation in the juris-
diction in which consumers reside which is typically remote from where the
supplier of services or goods is located. In 2015 the OECD observed that there
is “widespread consensus that the destination principle, with revenue accruing
in the country of import where final consumption occurs, is preferable to the
origin principle from both a theoretical and practical standpoint” *°

The International Law Association in 2018 proposed draft Guideline 26 on
the “Law Applicable to Ubiquitous or Multi-state Infringements” as a way to
navigate through some of these private international law issues:

(1) When the infringement in multiple states is pleaded in connection with
the use of ubiquitous or multinational media, it may be appropriate
to apply to the infringement as a whole only the law or laws of the
State(s) having an especially close connection with the global infringe-
ment. Relevant factors to determine the applicable law (or laws) in these
situations may be:

- the place where the harm caused by the infringement is substantial
in relation to the infringement in its entirety;

- the parties’ habitual residences or principal places of business;

- the place where substantial activities in furthering of the infringe-
ment have been carried out.

(2) Insituations where paragraph (1) is applied, any party may claim that,
with respect to particular States covered by the action, the solution
provided by any of those States’ laws differs from that obtained under
the law(s) chosen to apply to the case as a whole. The court must take
into account such differences when fashioning the remedy.

(3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) above may apply mutatis mutandis in cases of
secondary or indirect infringements of intellectual property rights.

While these issues remain to be fully resolved, the facts in Lucasfilm v Ainsworth
- where the UK defendants were direct-selling articles by online commerce
that were infringing articles under US law but not infringements under UK
law - offer an interesting hypothetical application of draft Guideline 26.
Seemingly, the flexibility conferred by paragraph (2) would permit a UK court
to both grant the injunction ultimately supported by the UK Supreme Court
restraining sales to the US and also arrive at the no-infringement conclusion
in relation to the UK.

In respect of the communication to the public right the territorial nature
of copyright has long been recognised as a complication, arising first in the
context of European satellite broadcasting. The three approaches for resolving
the legal puzzle of trans-national exercises of the communication right are:

(1) the treatment, as the governing law for any communication, the law of
the recipient or “footprint” country, described as the Bogsch Theory
(named after its proponent, a former WIPO Director General) and akin
to the “destination principle” described above in the area of consump-
tion taxation;
the law of the emitting country, described as the Emission Theory and
which the EU adopted for satellite transmissions; and
a hybrid of the two, described as the Communication Theory under
which “both the law of the country of emission as well as that of each
country covered by the footprint should be applicable” *°
In relation to the communication to the public right in Australian law, it will
be recalled that in general (ie. outside specific broadcasting settings) the
person exercising that right is “the person responsible for determining the
content of the communication”, and “to the public” is defined to mean “to the
public within or outside Australia” .** There has been to date some Australian
authority on the question of whether an offshore actor who communicates
subject matter to Australian recipients should be regarded as having exercised
the communication to the public right within Australia. In Roadshow v iiNet
Nicholas J made clear his view that “while the act of communication must
be done in Australia, it need not be done by a person who is physically in
Australia”; all that was required was that a person makes available or elec-
tronically transmits subject matter to a public that is situated in Australia
This view was also taken by both Foster J and Tracey J in separate first instance
decisions.” Likewise in Pokémon Company International v Redbubble, Pagane J

(2)

@

adopted the same position insofar as it was accepted that the “communica-
tions may, in the present case, have originated from Redbubble from outside
Australia but the infringing communications occurred in Australia” °° To
similar effect in Boomerang Investments v Padgett, Perram J found that Air
France had exercised the communication to the public right in Australia, even
though it had no physical ticketing office in Australia, through its communica-
tions through both YouTube and on-hold music to the public in Australia.”
However, the plain language of the 1968 Act also compels a conclusion that
the communication to the public right is exercised when a person in Australia
makes available or electronically transmits subject matter to a public that is
wholly situated outside of Australia. In this regard, it seems that Australia
has (subject to appellate revision or statutory reform) effectively adopted the
so-called Communication Theory: local jurisdiction attaches to communica-
tions whether emanating from the local jurisdiction to a foreign public or made
to a local public from a foreign jurisdiction.** The Communication Theory, if
carried forward as an international norm, would represent a significant inroad
into strict notions of territoriality.”

7.3 Direct infringement

Both s 36(1) in Part III and s 101(1) in Part IV provide that “subject to this Act”
copyright is “infringed by a person who, not being the owner of the copyright,
and without the licence of the owner of the copyright, does in Australia ...
any act comprised in the copyright”. This is so-called “direct infringement” of
copyright and many of the principles elaborated in this chapter and in previous
chapters can be seen to apply here:

(1) The plaintiff must own (or be the exclusive licensee) of the exclusive
right in issue, being a right attached to recognised and subsisting
subject matter.

(2) The defendant must have exercised that right in Australia (i.e. within
the territoriality constraints of the 1968 Act) in relation to at least a
substantial part of that subject matter.

(3) That exercise by the defendant must have been done without the
licence (permission) of the owner of the copyright.”

Of these three elements, it is only the final one that requires elaboration.
Licence means permission, and in the context of litigation involving alleged
infringement by dealing, the High Court in Avel v Multicoin Amusement has
made it plain enough that the onus of proving the absence of the licence of
the copyright owner in copyright litigation “lies on the party who asserts
infringement” because “the absence of such licence constitutes an element of
the wrong of infringement” While in many cases the issue of permission is a
binary one, and a plaintiff owner will be readily able to establish that absence,
in Avel v Multicoin Amusement the majority, when considering planned
action of Multicoin, took the view that the facts gave rise to the inference
that a third-party copyright owner, Williams, was indifferent to Multicoin’s
threatened conduct. Proof of that indifference did not discharge Avel’s onus
of establishing that the threatened act by Multicoin would have been done
“without the licence” of the owner, Williams.” It should also be noted here
and as discussed in Chapter 4 (see: 4.6) that in the case of co-ownership of
copyright, infringement arises if an exploitation of copyright occurs without
the licence of all owners.*

7A Infringement by authorisation

7.41 General principles

Infringement by authorising another is one of the more fraught areas of
Australian copyright law. Section 36(1) in Part I and s 101(1) in Part IV each
provide that distinct from direct infringement, infringement may also occur
when an unlicensed person “authorizes the doing in Australia” of an act
comprised in the copyright. It is apparent from the statutory language that the
authorising person may be outside Australia; however, the authorised act must
have been undertaken in Australia. As part of the Digital Agenda Reforms,
and with an eye to University of New South Wales v Moorhouse (“Moorhouse”),
a decision was made to provide statutory guidance on what matters must be
taken into account when determining if authorisation has occurred.“ The three
non-exhaustive matters to which regard must be had were codified as:

(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing of the act
concerned;

(b) the nature of any relationship existing between the person and the
person who did the act concerned;

(©) whether the person took any reasonable steps to prevent or avoid the
doing of the act, including whether the person complied with any
relevant industry codes of practice

In addition to this general authorisation liability, since the 1911 Act there has
been specific provision, which today takes the form of s 39, that creates distinct
sui generis liability in those who, with objective knowledge of likely infringe-
ment, permit on commercial terms a place of public entertainment “to be used
for a performance in public of the work, where the performance constitutes an
infringement of copyright of the work”.

7.4.1.1 Foundational case law

Prior to 1911, UK copyright statutes described exclusive rights in terms of
doing a nominated act or “causing” the act to be done.” Case law gave a
narrow interpretation of the circumstances in which a person might “cause” an
act to be done. No one could be considered to have “caused” the doing of an act
unless it was done by that person, the person’s agent or servant. Thus, one case
had found that the owner of a venue who had let it out for infringing musical
performances was not “causing” those performances even after the receipt
of notice from copyright owners.* Another case had found that supplying
copies of a film to cinemas for public exhibition was not “causing” their public
exhibition.* In such cases the courts did not consider the defendants should
be made responsible for what was done by those who actually performed or
exhibited because the music performers and film cinemas respectively were
arm’s length contracting parties, neither agent nor servant of the defendants.

The Copyright Act 1911 (UK) removed the “causing” to be done expression
that had been interpreted so narrowly by the courts. Substituted in its place
was an exclusive rights structure which listed a bundle of acts, and added
to them: “to authorize any such acts as aforesaid”. As flagged above, also
inserted at this time was more specific type of authorisation liability for a
person who “permits” a place of entertainment to be used for an infring-
ing public performance unless that person was legitimately unaware of the

infringement.* From the 1920s the case law began to reflect the broader indirect
liability regime enacted. Thus where a person had supplied a copy of a film to
cinemas for public exhibition, liability was found for authorising the resultant
exhibitions. The Court of Appeal stated: “it becomes fairly apparent that the
object of introducing the word ‘authorise’ was to get rid of the effect of certain
decisions” .” In place of the pre-1911 law, the Oxford Dictionary definition of
“to sanction, approve, countenance” was adopted for authorisation, which was
given a scope of operation that encompassed the supply of copies of the film
by the defendant to theatres.* With the creation of the more specific liability
for the grant of permission for the use of entertainment venues, that liability
was often pleaded in conjunction with general authorisation liability. This led
toa judicial harmonisation of the meanings given to the terms “to permit” and
“to authorise”.

Thus, under the new legislative regime the Anglo-Australian judicial
interpretation was that one could “authorise” another's action in two broad
settings. One was to explicitly grant approval to do an infringing act, such as
by purporting to grant a licence to do the act.* The other was to implicitly
suggest approval of the doing of an infringing act, such as by failing to take
steps to prevent the doing of the act where one had power to prevent and
ought to have known of its occurrence.» It is useful to compare these with
the two principles of indirect liability that emerged over the course of the
20th century in US copyright law; contributory and vicarious infringement.
Contributory infringement requires an intentional inducement or encourage-
ment of the direct infringement; vicarious infringement requires profit from
direct infringement where a right is held (and not exercised) to stop or limit that
direct infringement.” The explicit and implicit forms of authorisation liability
identified in early 20th century Anglo-Australian jurisprudence find loose
counterparts in the US principles of contributory and vicarious infringement.

Throughout the middle part of the 20th century most authorisation cases
involved an alleged authorisation of an infringing public performance. In the
1970s and 1980s the complexion of indirect liability case law changed insofar
as the types of infringing activity alleged to have been authorised broadened
to exercises of the reproduction right by private actors. Both the UK House
of Lords and the US Supreme Court found no liability when asked: could
the supply to households of chattels in the field of magnetic tape-recording
technology create liability in the supplier? In the UK case there was found to be
no express authorisation liability because suppliers did not expressly purport

to granta licence to copy.** The House of Lords also found that because suppli-
ers had no control over the private use of their chattels once they were sold,
implicit authorisation liability could not exist.” In the US case there was no
contributory infringement because the recording equipment was found to have
substantially non-infringing uses (which included recording for viewing at a
more convenient time, found by the same court to fall within the scope of the
US fair use exception) and thus its supply could not comprise encouragement
to infringe. The US Supreme Court also rejected the possibility of vicarious
liability because the supplier was not in a position to control the private use
of the chattels post-supply.*

However in Moorhouse the Australian High Court found liability which
involved not merely the supply of chattels, but also the provision of a form
of services to the direct infringer. In that case “trap copying” by an ordinary
member of the general public - who was not an enrolled university student or
university staff member - was undertaken by him in a university library, from
a copy of a book held in the library, by means of a coin-operated photocopier
also situated in the library. The university, by the provision of the photocopier
in the library and making available the book as a library holding, and the
permission to a member of the public to avail himself of the university's real
and chattel property in order for him to make the copy, was said to have
“authorised” the subsequent trap copying. The High Court unanimously
found this to be so. One judge (Gibbs J) emphasised in his reasoning a more
control-based approach (akin to vicarious infringement under US law) to
justify liability: power to prevent the infringing act, objective knowledge,
failure to take reasonable steps to prevent. Two judges (Jacobs J with whom
McTiernan ACJ agreed) emphasised a more approval-based approach (akin to
contributory infringement under US law) to justify liability. Under that view,
the copying self-service offered by the university effectively invited users to
infringe and where permission is expressed or implied it was unnecessary
that the authorising party had knowledge that a particular act comprised in
the copyright will be done.* The result was a victory for the copyright owner
in the case, and the creation of a seemingly broad Australian authorisation
principle.

7.4.1.2 Control-based settings

Asalient distinction between US and UK cases on the one hand, and Moorhouse
on the other, was that the alleged authoriser in Moorhouse remained in a
service-provider relationship with the person doing the acts said to be author-
ised, at the very time those acts were undertaken. In the US and UK cases the
alleged authoriser was in no service-provider relationship with the person
doing the infringing acts said to be authorised; they were chattel vendors and
their chattels in each case had been alienated by them at the time of the acts.
At the relevant time of primary infringement the defendant had control over
that act in Moorhouse, whereas in the US and UK cases the defendants had
none. This critical role of control at the relevant time of primary infringement
emerged strongly as an explicator of the result in Moorhouse in Australian
jurisprudence over the 1980s and 1990s with a series of cases rejecting the
possibility of authorisation liability in Australia after a defendant had alienated
chattel property comprising a chattel capable of being used by the purchaser
to infringe. Conversely, the Full Court unanimously found that a company
director and the principal executive officer of a company had authorised that
company’s infringement of copyright by the unlicensed performance in public
of music at a venue (the Old Windsor Tavern) the company owned. The Full
Court found that the director, a Mr Jain, had undertaken:
[A] studied and deliberate course of action in which Mr Jain decided to
ignore the appellant's rights and to allow a situation to develop and to
continue in which he must have known that it was likely that the appellant's
music would be played without any licence from it. It was within his power
to control what was occurring but he did nothing at all. In those circum-
stances we have reached the conclusion that the appellant established that
Mr Jain authorised the infringement of copyright in question.”

With the Digital Agenda Reforms set out above the centrality of relational
control at the time of infringement was reinforced in 2001 with the codified
matters that courts are required to consider.® Thus in a 2016 case, another
company director was emphatically found by the Full Court to have authorised
the infringements undertaken by his companies by reference to the three codi-
fied matters.®

Indeed after codification the factors tied to relational control and steps
taken to prevent infringement emerged as the most critical in two cases involv-
ing internet intermediaries: Universal Music v Cooper (“Cooper”) and Universal
Music 0 Sharman License Holdings (“ Sharman”).”° As explained in Chapter 6 (see:

6.7.3 and 6.7.4), in Cooper the defendant had assembled on his <mp3s4free.
net> webpage internet links resolving to mp3-format music files, being files
uploaded by other parties around the world unrelated to Cooper and being
files uploaded without the authority of rights holders. Visitors to Cooper's
webpage were thus provided with a navigational means to copy those mp3
files. Hence “mp3s4free” literally advertised that visitors to the website
could use it to obtain copies of sound recordings and the works contained
therein without the need for payment. In so obtaining, visitors would infringe
copyright. In Sharman the defendant had published the KaZaa peer-to-peer
file-sharing software. The network was notorious for the peer-to-peer distri-
bution of content without rights holder authorisation. Whether Cooper or
Sharman had the requisite control over the infringing activities of visitors to
<mp3s4free.net> and users of the KaZaa peer-to-peer network was the central
question in both cases.

Were <mp3s4free.net> and the KaZaa network more like alienated chattels
or ongoing services? All Federal Court judges considering the cases concluded
there existed the requisite control for authorisation liability. Coming through
both cases was an acceptance that the post-Moorhouse case law establishes a
broad concept of what can amount to authorisation. While some control is
always required, the question of the degree or nature of that control may vary
according to the circumstances. While a high-level control coupled with indif-
ference or wilful blindness might comprise authorisation (such as in Moorhouse
itself), in other cases (such as in Cooper and Sharman) marginal control would
suffice if coupled with active encouragement. In the Full Court's consideration
of Cooper, Branson J considered that arming or facilitation conduct alone could
comprise the relevant control: “a person’s power to prevent the doing of an
act comprised in a copyright includes the person’s power not to facilitate the
doing of that act by, for example, making available to the public a techni-
cal capacity calculated to lead to the doing of that act”: Kenny J in Cooper
made the same point: Cooper could have prevented the infringing acts by not
establishing the links included on <mp3s4free.net>, and the fact that users
could make online copies of the uploaded sound recordings by other means
did not negate the authorisation of copying consequent upon using the links
found on <mp3s4free.net>.” In Shannan, Wilcox J concluded that through the
KaZaa file sharing network the defendant was providing facilities for making a
communication (see: 7.4.2.2), it was not a passive provider: it maintained some
technical connection to those using the network so as to target advertising, it
had omitted to apply a system of keyword filtering, and most importantly it
had actively and knowingly encouraged copyright infringement by those who
used the network.”

These cases were considered by Pagone J in Pokémon Company International
v Redbubble.”* The defendant, Redbubble, offered a service which permitted.
its artist members, who had created works of visual art, to connect with
purchasing customers who could order from a range of products on which
those works were printed. A prospective customer who visited the Redbubble
website would observe (inter alia) photographic representations of finished
items - such as T-shirts ornamented with the designs of a particular artist
member ~ and place an order for the items selected to be printed. The print-
ing occurred only after an order had been accepted. In this way, each article
sold was made-to-order. Redbubble, while facilitating the so-called “system
of a marketplace” did not itself carry out the printing and it did not employ
the artists. The plaintiff copyright owner was concerned that what was being
sold by means of that system comprised infringements of its artistic works. It
claimed (among other infringement grounds) that Redbubble was authorising
reproductions of its works by arranging for the manufacture of those items
chosen by customers. On review of the authorities and the codified matters,
Pagone J considered that Redbubble’s level of control, the nature of its relation-
ships with artists and printers, and its failure to take reasonable enough steps
led to a positive finding of authorisation liability. The court concluded in these
terms:

The business established by Redbubble carried the inherent risk of infringe-
ment of copyright of the kind complained of by [the plaintiff]. It is true that
Redbubble sought to mitigate the risk, but it was an inevitable incident of
the business, as Redbubble chose to conduct it, that there were likely to be
infringements. It could have prevented them by taking other steps but for
business reasons Redbubble chose to deal with the risk of infringement by
a process that enabled the infringements to occur. Such infringements were
embedded in the system which was created for, and adopted by, Redbubble.
There may have been a sound commercial basis for Redbubble to manage
the risks of infringement as it did, but in doing so it authorised the infringe-
ments which occurred.*
Central to this conclusion was the ultimate control that Redbubble had over
the design of a system in which “infringements were embedded” .” Once that
embedding is factored in, the measures required of Redbubble to prevent or
avoid those infringements were found to be more rigorous than those it had
in fact instituted.

7.4.1.3, Approval-based settings

While the existence of requisite control has emerged as a touchstone for
authorisation liability, there also remains a possibility in current Australian
law for liability to arise from the mere giving of approval (whether expressly
or implicitly) to another to infringe, and this was indeed the very basis

upon which Jacobs J and McTiernan ACJ had found liability in Moorhouse.”
Gummow J in )VEA International v Hanimex Corporation considered approval-
based authorisation as the paradigm: the setting where a defendant purported
to grant a copyright licence to another to exercise an exclusive right, where in
truth the defendant had no such right. Observing that “certainly the concept
of ‘authorisation’ applies to such a situation”, Gummow J pointed to early
Australian authority “where the defendant was fixed with liability for authori-
sation for having directly and expressly agreed with another party to produce
for him a film from a screen play which infringed the plaintiff's copyright
in a novel”. Control-based authorisation (premised on a power to prevent
infringement, knowledge of infringement and countenancing the infringement
of the type identified by Gibbs J in Moorhouse) was regarded by Gummow J in
WEA International v Hanimex Corporation as an extended form of authorisation
liability; the central form of authorisation liability was in the defendant who
purported to grant a licence.

However for liability to arise from approval-based authorisation, the
party authorised must have infringed pursuant to the purported licence. So
that in 1VEA International v Hanimex Corporation Gummow J observed while
quia timet relief may be available to restrain a defendant from continuing to
grant purported licences prior to anyone actually infringing in reliance, “the
cause of action for authorisation of infringement is not complete without
the final event”.” More stark was the setting that confronted Perram J in
Boomerang Investments v Padgett discussed in Chapter 6 (see: 6.3.3) where an
issue was whether the defendants were liable (by licensing their own } Varm in
the VWVinter song) for authorising digital platforms (such as iTunes) to stream
and download a substantial part of the plaintiffs’ musical work Love is in the
Air. However, because those platforms had been found to be licensed by the
relevant owners of the communication and reproduction rights of Love is in the
Air Perram J held, consistent with Gummow J in }VEA International v Hanimex
Corporation, that there can be no liability for authorising an infringement under
s 36(1) unless it could be shown that authorisation was causally connected to
an actual act of infringement.

In Larrikin v EMI discussed in Chapter 6 (see: 6.3.3) the defendants, by their
licensing dealings with the copyright pertaining to the Men at Work Down
Under song, had purported to licence third parties to exploit the plaintiff's
musical work copyright in Kookaburra, based on the finding the former song
comprised a reproduction of the latter musical work. However, Jacobson J
at trial considered the codified factor of taking reasonable steps to prevent
infringement “turns on whether [the defendants] knew or had reason to
suspect that the making of a sound recording of ‘Down Under’ constituted

an infringement of copyright in ‘Kookaburra’”, citing Gibbs J’s approach in
Moorhouse. On the trial judge’s view, without such knowledge, authorisa-
tion could not arise. The judge’s approach appears to erroneously treat the
Digital Agenda Reforms as exhaustively codifying copyright authorisation
in the shape of the Gibbs J reasoning in Moorhouse. By so holding the trial
judge seems to have overlooked the core form of authorisation identified by
Gummow J in WEA International » Hanimex Corporation: purporting to grant a
licence, which was applied by the majority reasoning in Moorhouse and clearly
did not require such knowledge.® In the Full Court Jagot J, with Emmett and
Nicholas JJ agreeing, held that the approach taken by the trial judge required
reconsideration: “Larrikin’s case was to the effect that the grant of a licence
by the [defendants] to reproduce ‘Down Under’ necessarily involved authori-
sation of the kind referred to in )VEA International v Hanimex.”** For such a
core act of authorisation, and as the Jacobs J majority reasoning made clear in
Moorhouse, knowledge was not an element of liability. For copyright liability
to arise in the defendants, the critical issue is that the authorised third parties’
infringements were caused by the purported grant of licence.

In Tamawood v Habitare Developments a similar pattern emerged. The parties
had initially collaborated on a property development project and the defend-
ant had lodged architectural plans in which the plaintiff owned copyright
with the relevant local authority for approval. However, after approval was
granted a split emerged between the parties, and the defendant did not use
the plaintiff's plans to construct the buildings. Rather two directors of the
defendant asked another architectural firm, Mondo, to prepare suitable plans
although for development to occur within the scope of approval, the buildings
to be constructed to the Mondo plans were required to be “generally in accord-
ance with” the prior lodged plans in which the plaintiff was the copyright
owner. Upon a finding that the Mondo plans comprised an infringement
of the plaintiff's artistic work copyright, the trial judge rejected the finding
that the defendant directors were liable for authorising the infringement.
This was because the directors “had no knowledge or reason to suspect that
any infringement of [the plaintiff's] copyright might occur” and as such they
could not “be said to have authorised any infringements of [the plaintiff's]
copyright by Mondo”.® This was unanimously rejected by the Full Court,
accepting the plaintiffs submission that the defendant's directors had at least
conferred “a general permission” on Mondo such that “it is ... unnecessary
that the authorizing party have knowledge that a particular act comprised in

the copyright will be done” adopting the approach of Jacobs J in Moorhouse.
The Full Court observed that it was “the engagement of Mondo to prepare
construction plans that were ‘generally in accordance with’ [the plaintiff's]
plans that itself gave rise to the obvious risk, perceived by all, of infringement
of copyright” ©” However, the Full Court considered it to be obscure whether
any requirement existed that a probable risk of copyright infringement be
perceived by an alleged authoriser, and that any such requirement lacked
support in case law.

7.4.2 Online service providers

Until the landmark case of Roadshow Films v iiNet, the only judicial considera-
tion of the liability of a carriage service provider (being a telecommunications
or internet provider) for control-based authorisation was as an aspect of
Universal Music Australia » Cooper. Cooper's internet service provider (ISP),
E-Talk, had hosted the <mp3s4free.net> website without requiring payment
from Cooper, receiving instead in-kind payment through advertising space on
the website. By both hosting <mp3s4free.net> and placing advertising on the
site as the quid pro quo for hosting E-Talk was found (together with Cooper)
liable in authorising the infringements occurring via the site, given E-Talk’s
active participation with, and knowledge about, the website.” The closeness
of the relationship between E-Talk and Cooper bore limited resemblance to
the typical relationships between ISPs and their subscribers which were better
illustrated by the facts in Roadshow Films v iiNet.

7.4.2.1 Roadshow Films v iiNet

The most high-profile recent control-based authorisation litigation is Roadshow
Films v iiNet The plaintiffs were a group of major motion film copyright
owners. At the time of the litigation the defendant was Australia’s third largest
ISP and about 50% of its service was used for peer-to-peer file sharing which
often involved infringement by the making available and copying of (inter alia)
the plaintiffs’ films. The defendant's supply terms conferred upon it broad
discretion to cancel any service for illegal or unusual use, and for over a year it
received weekly infringement reports from the plaintiffs, which compiled iiNet
user accounts by their internet protocol addresses who had apparently been
engaged in infringing file sharing uses with titles in the plaintiffs’ repertoire.”

The defendant passed on some reports to the police and advised the plaintiffs
to send future reports directly to the police.* Internally, the defendant held the
views that it would cancel an account holder’s service only if a customer self-
confessed infringement (or there was a court order requiring cancellation) and
that “we are not obligated to do squat” on the weekly infringement reports.

The provision of the weekly reports for over a year permitted the plaintiffs’
case to be premised on the defendant: (i) being in a service provider relation-
ship with those accounts engaged in ongoing infringements; (ii) having some
knowledge (through the weekly reports) of infringements; (iii) armed with that
knowledge having considerable power to prevent such infringements by use
of its services; and (iv) by taking no steps in terms of warnings followed by
account cancellations, was countenancing the infringements. In other words,
pleading the type of control-based authorisation identified by Gibbs J in
Moorhouse and conduct able to be assimilated with the Digital Agenda codified
matters to which regard must be paid.

The trial judge found no authorisation could ever arise in an ISP such as
the defendant because it was not an entity “who provided the true ‘means’
of infringement”, which was said by the trial judge to be the BitTorrent peer-
to-peer file sharing software then in use.” The Full Court by majority upheld
the trial judge’s conclusion, but rejected the trial judge’s reasoning, holding
instead that once an ISP is properly notified of infringing activity by users of
its services, liability may arise if it fails to take any steps to attempt prevention.
Such failure could be characterised as authorising the infringements under the
codified factors. However, the Full Court majority thought that the defendant
had neither received proper notice (in the weekly reports) prior to commence-
ment of the action nor been made an offer of compensation from the plaintiffs
in the event the notices were inaccurate. In the Full Court majority’s view more
transparency as to the process of their creation was required and indemnifica-
tion offered to the ISP for loss arising from any wrongful terminations.*

The High Court unanimously dismissed the plaintiffs’ further appeal. A
three-member joint judgment considered the extent of the defendant's control
was limited to an “indirect power” to prevent a customer's infringing conduct
by account termination.” Also, the information contained in the weekly
notices when given to the defendant ISP did not provide the defendant with
a reasonable basis for sending warnings to individual customers with threats
to suspend or terminate those customers’ accounts.* As such, the defendant's
inactivity after receipt of the notices did not give rise to any authorisation by
countenancing ongoing acts of infringement by account holders. Similarly, a
two-member joint judgment held that the defendant “only in an attenuated
sense had power to ‘control’ the primary infringements” and it was not unrea-

sonable for it to not act on the basis of what was regarded by that judgment
as insufficient notice.”

The three-member opinion observed that its conclusion “shows that the
concept and the principles of the statutory tort of authorisation of copyright
infringement are not readily suited to enforcing the rights of copyright owners
in respect of widespread infringements occasioned by peer-to-peer file sharing,
as occurs with the BitTorrent system”. However, there was an undoubted
judicial choice involved in rejecting authorisation liability in this setting.
Writing in dissent in the Full Court, Jagot J could demonstrate that a find-
ing of authorisation liability was within orthodoxy given the weekly notices
and the belligerent posture that the defendant had adopted in response to
them. The High Court holding has the effect of largely protecting Australian
ISPs (and like intermediaries) from authorisation liability for the infringing
conduct of household subscribers. It thereby reduced the incentives for their
participation in the more regulatory solution put forward in Part V, Division
2AA (“the Australian safe harbour regime”) discussed below (see: 7.4.2.2)
being the very participation the plaintiffs sought and the defendant resisted.
As also discussed below (see: 7.4.2.3) Roadshow Films v iiNet was a trigger for
a law reform debate about both the safe harbour regime and authorisation
law more generally.

The precedential impact of Roadshow Films v iiNet in other settings has so
far been limited. The decision may be confined to its facts. In the face of creative
industry concern about the risks that the decision poses to enforcement against
digital platforms, the ACCC has observed that “the impact of this decision on
authorisation liability of digital platforms is not clear, because digital platforms
are likely to have a greater ability than ISPs to identify and prevent copyright-
infringing behaviour of their users”

7.4.2.2 The Australian safe harbour regime and other specific
exceptions

One of Australia’s intellectual property enforcement obligations under the
US-Australia Free Trade Agreement was art 17.11(29), the so-called safe
harbour regime. That FTA article explains that the safe harbour regime exists
“for the purposes of providing enforcement procedures that permit effective
action against any act of copyright infringement” and “legal incentives for
service providers to cooperate with copyright owners in deterring the unau-
thorised storage and transmission of copyrighted materials”. The origins of
the FTA obligation lie in the safe harbour regime of the US Digital Millennium
Copyright Act 1998 (DMCA). Jessica Litman, in her account of the origins of

the DMCA, has concisely explained the policy origins of the US safe harbour
regime as follows:

Content owners agreed that Internet service providers should not be liable
for their subscribers’ infringing transmissions so long as the provider had
no reason to suspect infringement was taking place, on the condition that
the service provider agreed to shut down copyright violators and remove
infringing material as soon as a content owner notified it of a violation.

The DMCA regime essentially applies to “service providers” who provide
one of the four types of online services as explained below. In contrast
under Part V, Division 2AA of the 1968 Act only “carriage service provid-
ers” (included since commencement on 1 January 2005 and which includes
telecommunications providers and internet service providers) and a selection
of public interest bodies (added since 29 December 2018) are eligible for the
Australian regime’s protections. Notably online service providers such as
Google, Microsoft or Facebook are not included in the Australian regime. The
protections are not a total shield from liability, but have the effect of removing
the possibility of a monetary award against the service provider for the four
designated activities.“ Two of those relate to activities undertaken largely
by the service provider itself: Category B - caching; Category D - informa-
tion location tools.” The other two relate to activities which in large part rely
upon the service provider facilitating requests by third-party users: Category
A - transmission; Category C - storage.” The remedial limitations offered
to any service provider for those activities are conditioned upon that service
provider assisting copyright owners in enforcing their rights on networks over
which the service provider has control. While each activity type has its own.
set of conditions ~ including notice and take-down conditions for Category B,
Cand D activities - for all four activities a general condition is that the service
provider must adopt and reasonably implement a policy that provides for the
termination, in appropriate circumstances, of the accounts of repeat infringers.
While it was largely such a policy not being adopted by the defendant that
precipitated the litigation in Roadshow Films v iiNet, the trial judge in the case
considered that because the defendant had adopted a position that it would
cancel an account holder's service only if a customer was a self-confessed
infringer or there was a court order requiring such cancellation, the defend-
ant had indeed adopted an account termination policy that met the general
condition.” The Full Court unanimously rejected the trial judge’s conclusion

and found the defendant to have no qualifying policy." The High Court chose
not to consider the issue at all.

Prior to the Australian safe harbour regime being inserted into the 1968
Act in 2005, Digital Agenda Reforms had inserted in 2001 a pair of provisions
in Part III (s 39B) and Part IV (s 112E) to the effect that a person (including
a carrier or carriage service provider) who provides facilities for making, or
facilitating the making of, a communication is not taken to have authorised any
infringement of copyright “merely because another person uses the facilities so
provided” to do something the right to do which is included in the copyright.
The exception has been interpreted literally and narrowly so that both the trial
judge and the Full Court in Roadshow Films v iiNet determined that the excep-
tion could not apply to the defendant because any finding of authorisation
liability for exercises of the communication to the public right would have
arisen in the defendant ISP for conduct quite beyond the mere use of facilities
that the defendant had provided? All members of the High Court agreed
with the Federal Court judges’ reading, with the three-member opinion in the
High Court noting that its narrowness meant that the exception only provided
protection in settings where no authorisation liability could arise."

7.4.2.3 Failed reform

In 2014 the Australian Government initiated a reform initiative in which two
of the three reforms put forward related to authorisation and the safe harbour
regime.“ The intention was to reform the codified matters for authorisation
liability in ss 36(1A) and 101(1A) so that:
In determining whether a person has authorised an infringing act, a court
would still be required to consider the nature of the relationship between
the person authorising the infringement and the person who did the infring-
ing act, and whether the person took any reasonable steps to prevent or
avoid the infringing act (as currently required).
In making an assessment of the ‘reasonable steps’ element, a court must
have regard to:

(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing of the act
concerned;

(b) whether the person or entity was complying with any relevant industry
schemes or commercial arrangements entered into by relevant parties;

(c) whether the person or entity complied with any prescribed measures
in the Copyright Regulations 1969; and

(d) any other relevant factors.

The ‘power to prevent’ the infringing act would no longer be a separate

element, but would be only one of a number of relevant factors in deter-

mining whether ‘reasonable steps’ were taken to prevent or avoid the

infringement. The amendments would clarify that the absence of a direct

power to prevent a particular infringement would not, of itself, preclude a

person from taking reasonable steps to prevent or avoid an infringing act

This authorisation reform was sought by copyright-dependent industries in
the wake of the High Court decision in Roadshow Films v iiNet and was clearly
intended to loosen what was seen as an overtly rigid approach in that decision
to the “power to prevent” aspect in the codification.
The intention underpinning the reform to the safe harbour regime, which

at the time was limited to “carriage service providers”, was to:

extend the application of the safe harbour scheme to entities engaged in the

activities set out in sections 116AC to 116AF. This would be achieved by

removing the reference to carriage service provider and replacing it with a

definition of ‘service provider’, being any person who engages in activities

defined in sections 116AC to 116AF."*
This reform, which would have closely harmonised the Australian safe harbour
regime with its US progenitor, was called for by companies such as Google
and Facebook, who are covered by the US DMCA safe harbour but excluded
from the counterpart Australian regime. It would have put the focus, properly,
on what an online service provider is doing rather than who an online service
provider is."” This pair of reforms entailed a trading-off between sectors and
for reasons shrouded in politics neither reform was enacted.

7.5 Dealings in articles made by infringement

Section 38 in Part III and its Part IV counterpart, s 103, impose a type of copy-
right liability that can be traced to the earliest form of statutory copyright:
commercial dealings in items when it is known by the dealer those items had
been made by infringing copyright." In the 1968 Act the sections have cousins:
s 37 in Part III and s 102 in Part IV. These provide similar liability upon those

who import articles into Australia for commercial trade purposes without the
licence of the copyright owner when the importer knew or ought reasonably
to have known that “if the article had been made in Australia by the importer,
have constituted an infringement of the copyright”.

7.51 General principles

Absent a specific exception, for liability to arise under any of these provi-
sions for dealings in articles that were made by infringing copyright, four
basic issues arise: (i) what conduct amounts to a relevant dealing in an article
for these provisions; (ii) has the conduct occurred without copyright owner
permission; (iii) what is the standard to assess relevant knowledge in the dealer
of the article’s status as an infringement; and (iv) what is an “article”?

7.5.1.1 Restricted conduct

Subject to a 2006 amendment to the definition of what is an “article” (see: 7.5.1.4),
the type of dealings which give rise to infringement have remained remarkably
stable since the 1911 Act. They relate, at their core, to commercial dealings
in chattels. The Statute of Anne itself had created liability on booksellers who
(inter alia) sold or exposed for sale books that they knew to have been made
in infringement of copyright. The 1911 Act elaborated the conduct as:

(a) sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade exposes or offers for sale or hire;
or
distributes either for the purposes of trade or to such an extent as to
affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright; or
()_ by way of trade exhibits in public; or
(d) imports for sale or hire into any part of His Majesty’s dominions to

which this Act extends.”

(b)

When the 1911 drafting is viewed against current law, it can be seen that
the restricted conduct has remained essentially unchanged albeit applied in
modern contexts unimagined in 1911. So that in Pokémon v Redbubble Pagone J
readily concluded that the defendant had via its website “exhibited articles in
public by projecting images on products which were able to be sold to potential
customers” ?°

7.5.1.2 Absence of permission

The plaintiff must prove, on balance of probabilities, that the defendant engaged
in the dealing without the licence of the copyright owner. This is not a matter
that goes to knowledge and simply must be established as a matter of binary
fact. However as Avel v Multicoin reveals, this is not always so binary.’ The

case was essentially concerned with the issue of permission in circumstances
where the copyright owner, Williams, was indifferent to a proposed importa-
tion of its second-hand pinball machines by Multicoin. The High Court in that
case was unwilling to convert that indifference into evidence of the absence
of a licence: Avel, Williams's Australian distributor of new pinball machines,
had “failed to discharge the onus of proving that, in the hypothetical event
that the proposed import and resale of the used machines had gone ahead, it
would have been without the licence of Williams” #7

7.5.1.3 Knowledge requirement

The critical and complex choke point on dealings liability is knowledge: that
the defendant dealt with articles that it knew or should have known were made
(or for importers, if they were made in Australia by the importer) by infringing
the Australian copyright. Before the Gregory Committee, several music rights
holder peak bodies sought to remove the knowledge requirement on the basis
that its proof caused hardship. This was rejected by the Committee on the
basis that “in the absence of any form of registration [of copyright], it would not
be reasonable to make a person liable for a secondary infringement unless he
is aware that the material with which he is dealing is unauthorised” *™ Similar
concerns were expressed before the Spicer Committee, and answered in the
same way.” However unlike the Gregory Committee, the Spicer Committee
recommended an onus reversal so that “the onus should be on the importer,
seller or dealer to prove that he was not aware and had no reasonable grounds
for suspecting that the making or importation of the work concerned was an
infringement of copyright” This recommendation was not enacted.

As enacted in both the 1956 Act and the 1968 Act the statutory knowledge
requirement conveyed that actual subjective knowledge must be established
by the plaintiff. So that s 38 as first enacted required for liability a dealing by the
defendant with an article “where, to his knowledge, the making of the article
constituted an infringement of the copyright” .”” In 1991 this was expanded.
for all the dealings provisions to objective or constructive knowledge, with the
requirement now being expressed as “if the person knew, or ought reasonably
to have known” - which remains current law.” Von Doussa J observed shortly
after this reform that the standard “refers to notice of facts such as would
suggest to a reasonable person having the ordinary understanding expected
of persons in the particular line of business that a breach of copyright was
being committed”

In 1997 this objective standard was applied by the Full Court. The Full
Court had before it a defendant, Raben Footwear, which was an importer and
seller of music compact discs from Germany. The German manufacturer had
in response to a question prior to the importation alerted the defendant of the
need to satisfy the conditions of the s 55 statutory licence for the works repro-
duced, however nothing was said about clearing the sound recording rights
owned by the plaintiff, Polygram. The relevant Part IV provision, s 102, since
the 1991 reforms required an objective assessment to be made as to whether
the defendant ~ not some other person - knew or ought reasonably to have
known that, had the defendant made the article in Australia, the making would
have constituted an infringement in the copyright. The knowledge standard
allowed regard to be had to the defendant's objective circumstances. The Full
Court considered that the German manufacturer's “guarded” response to the
defendant's copyright inquiry ought reasonably to have led the defendant
to ascertain the true position in relation to sound recording copyright. This
was because the defendant was aware of the distinction between copyright
in works, subject to a statutory licence, and copyright in sound recordings.
This led to the Full Court making the positive finding that the plaintiff had
established that the defendant possessed the knowledge that by importing
the discs embodying the sound recordings it would require the licence of the
Australian copyright owner.

Davies J has considered a setting where the plaintiff and defendant shared
the same offshore manufacturer of printed bed linen, who had used samples
in which the plaintiff owned artistic work copyright as points of reference to
manufacture similar product lines for the defendant. In all the circumstances
the trial judge considered that “there was no reason for [the defendant] to
be put on notice that they ought to have made further inquiries about the
copyright in the designs” .*° As such the importation of the linen by it gave rise
to no s 37 liability. However, after the goods were in the defendant's possession
in Australia, and upon receipt of an email from the plaintiff attaching docu-
ments which evidenced the plaintiffs copyright ownership, Davies J held that
the defendant ought reasonably to have known that the goods would have
infringed the plaintiff's copyright if they had been made in Australia and that
sales of the goods after that date comprised infringement under s 38.%

7.5.1.4 Meaning of an “article”

The term “article” was first introduced in this context in the 1956 Act but was
not defined for the purpose of these provisions. This approach was carried over
to the 1968 Act when it was first enacted. In the context of the provisions, it
seems clear enough that the term was intended in both Acts to mean “chattel”
~ witness the language in the Australian provisions of “exhibiting the article
in public”, “the making of the article”, “imports an article” and “an imported
article”. Thus, in Universal Music » Cooper Tamberlin J had no difficulty in
concluding that “article” for the purpose of s 103 meant “a material thing or
tangible object” and could not extend to any online digital file that Cooper
through his <mp3s4free.net> website supplied links to”

However, for reasons that are not entirely clear, in 2001 as part of the
Digital Agenda Reforms a decision was made to assimilate communication
to the public exploitations within an existing criminal provision, s 132, that
was directed inter alia to dealings in articles. Section 132(1), (2), (2A) and (4) at
this time substantively replicated, in proscriptive language, the civil liability
provisions ss 37, 38, 102 and 103. Rather than taking the step of enacting a
new criminal provision that would separately criminalise the communication
to the public right when infringed for commercial gain, assimilation of the
communication right into the dealings provisions of s 132 occurred by adding
two new definitions (ina new s 132(9)) that were to apply to s 132 alone:

article includes a reproduction or copy of a work or other subject-matter,
being a reproduction or copy in electronic form.
distribute includes distribute by way of communication."

The relevant Explanatory Memorandum explained the effect of the new
“article” definition was “to clarify that the term article includes an article
in electronic form” and the intent of the new “distribute” definition was “to
ensure that the offences in s 132 of the Act which relate to distribution apply
both to the making available element and the transmission element of the new
communication right” 1

When the plaintiff in Universal Music v Cooper sought to rely upon this new
definition of “article” to establish liability in Cooper under s 103, Tamberlin J
pointed out:

This specific definition does not assist the applicants’ case in this civil
proceeding. Indeed, the fact that it was considered necessary to give a
specific and extensive definition of the concept of ‘article’ in s 132(9) without
amending or defining the reference to ‘article’ in other sections supports
the respondents’ case that ‘article’ does not include the facilitating service
provided by the Cooper website in the present case."

In 2006, the year following this decision by Tamberlin J, the Parliament added
to ss 38 and 103 the same definition of “article” taken from the criminal provi-
sions, but not the definition of “distribute” from the criminal regime." The
addition was explained in this way:
The amendment is designed to ensure the definition of ‘article’ in the civil
secondary dealing provisions (existing ss 38 and 103) is consistent with the
definition in the related criminal offences ... Under the criminal offence
provisions of the Act, ‘article’ is defined to specifically include a ‘repro-
duction or copy in electronic form’. This definition is not adopted in the
existing related civil provisions in ss 38 and 103. The result is that online
distribution of, or the offer to sell, an infringing electronic reproduction may
have constituted a criminal offence, but not necessarily a civil infringement
under the Act.
This partial harmonisation of the civil provisions with the criminal provisions
(i.e. the adoption of the new “article” definition but not a new “distribute” defi-
nition including communication) compounds the incoherence introduced by
the reform to the criminal regime in 2001. First it is unclear why this civil reform
was ever required in view of the existing direct liability (ie. liability without
a knowledge requirement) for communication to the public that attaches to
all works and other subject matter except published editions, and the fact that
in the Universal Music v Cooper litigation all four judges who heard the case
considered Cooper to be liable in authorisation. As it stands, the inserted defi-
nition of “article” appears as a thoughtless overlay upon civil provisions which
are anchored to trade in chattel articles - as Tamberlin J observed. Second,
because the criminal regime's “distribute” definition inscribing communica-
tion is not also inscribed into the civil regime of ss 38 and 103, even greater
ambiguity arises. This leads to the unsatisfactory outcome that, notwithstand-
ing the 2006 Explanatory Memorandum, the “article” definition in the civil
provisions could be (and probably should be’) interpreted as confined to
chattel articles embodying reproductions or copies in electronic form - such as
compact discs or DVDs. However in Pokémon v Redbubble, Pagone J held that
the defendant had by its website “exhibited articles in public by projecting
images on products which were able to be sold to potential customers”. This
holding was arrived at on the basis that the uploaded photographs of products
(photographs which were merely representations of future goods being sold
by description) had been found by Pagone J to be themselves “articles” by

reason of the new definition: “each is an article, albeit in an electronic form, as
contemplated by the extended definition in s 38(3)”

7.5.2 Parallel importation exceptions

One of the more heated topics in copyright law reform in the past few decades
(and a similar debate has played out in trade mark law) has been the capacity
of a party owning the Australian rights to restrain (by use of ss 37, 38, 102 and
103) the importation and sale of chattels that were lawfully put onto the market
elsewhere in the world - often by that same party or an entity associated to
it. The third-party Australian importer and dealer in such case is said to be
engaging in “parallel importation”, insofar as the imported goods are being
dealt with in a metaphorical parallel with those of the party owning the local
rights, and the goods are sometimes called “grey market” goods - as opposed
to “black market” (i.e. outright pirated) goods. It is not a question that treaty
law deals with.“

In short, the policy position arrived at in Australian copyright law (and
under the Trade Marks Act,” the Circuit Layouts Act“ and to some extent under
the Designs Act**) has been to create exceptions to facilitate parallel importa-
tion broadly on the basis that Australians should have a lawful entitlement to
trade in goods lawfully sold anywhere in the world. Such a policy position is
consistent with a desire for the global exhaustion of copyright so as to remove
any right to control the international trade in chattel property after the first
sale of the chattel anywhere in the world, being a sale of an item made with the
permission of the relevant copyright owner. The alternative ~ a strict territory-
by-territory approach to exhaustion — permits parallel importation control by
local copyright owners which traditionally has permitted price discrimination
between (high-price) territorial markets with a high willingness to pay for a
chattel such as a printed book, and (low-price) territories with a low willing-
ness to pay for it.

In its 2013 decision Kirtsaeng v John Wiley & Sons, the US Supreme Court
effectively removed parallel importation controls from US copyright law and
adopted a global exhaustion principle.” Kirtsaeng is instructive because it
highlights the type of price discrimination able to be undertaken with parallel
importation control over goods, and the response of the copyright owner to
the removal of that control. Publisher Wiley price discriminated between the
US market and markets in less developed nations when selling university text-
books; the US editions were priced considerably higher. An entrepreneurial

Thai national, studying in the United States, began parallel importing to the US
the cheaper Wiley international editions sourced from Thailand. The importa-
tion was found by a US Supreme Court majority to qualify under the (newly
clarified) US first sale doctrine. In response, shortly after the decision was
handed down publisher Wiley announced that it would set uniform global
pricing of its entire catalogue of textbooks at the higher US prices, including
any international student edition which corresponded to a US edition."

Prior to the current Australian copyright statutory exceptions being fully
enacted, there were several high-profile copyright cases in which copyright
owners successfully restrained parallel importation and sale within Australia
of items such as books (Interstate Parcel v Time-Life*”), labelled bottles of liqueur
(R & A Bailey & Cov Boccaccio) and compact discs (Raben Footwear v Polygram
Records) - all of which were first put onto the market in a foreign copyright
territory lawfully prior to the goods’ importation into Australia. The outcomes
in such cases are contrary to a policy that facilitates parallel importation, and in
several tranches of reform - 1989, 1991, 1998 and 2003 - new exceptions have
been enacted. In current law, parallel importation can be restrained only in
settings that fall outside of those exceptions:

* In 1989 the first such exception arose not in the 1968 Act but rather in
the Circuit Layouts Act 1989, s 24(1) of which enacted a global exhaustion
principle in respect of trade in protected authorised integrated circuits,
and which in s 24(2) created a corresponding copyright exception so
as to ensure the Australian exploitation of the integrated circuits could
not be held-up by s 37 or s 38 copyright liability related to any work
(most obviously a computer program) therein contained.”

* In 1991 a limited exception regime for printed books was enacted. An
exception to the dealings provisions for parallel importation and sale
of the imported grey goods was created if a book title is unpublished
in Australia within 30 days of its foreign publication, or it is otherwise
not supplied to an Australian customer within 90 days of the customer
placing an order for the book."

* In 1998 broad exceptions were made for the importation and distribu-
tion of a goods’ labels or packaging (defined as an “accessory”) made
offshore under the authority of the relevant copyright owner in a

qualifying Berne or WTO country when imported or distributed with
the goods, and for the importation and distribution of sound record-
ings lawfully made offshore.”

* In 2003, in the wake of the Intellectual Property Competition Review
of 2000 which had recommended that all restrictions on parallel
importation should be removed, further exceptions were added for the
importation and distribution of computer programs and “electronic
literary or music item” (being books, periodicals and sheet music in
electronic forms) lawfully made offshore in a qualifying Berne or WTO
country. Also in 2003 the definition of an “accessory” to an item
was expanded to include any copyright subject matter (other than a
“feature film” of more than 20 minutes duration) that is included with
a computer program, an “electronic literary or music item” or a copy
of a sound recording.”

Taken together it is possible to ascertain that there are two clear statutory
carve-outs from the exceptions for which the possibility of parallel importation
control of chattel trade deliberately remains: book titles that are being supplied
into the Australian market so as to negate the conditions set by the statutory
regime and feature length films. However, there may be other items that
remain amenable for (arguably) “accidental” parallel importation restrictions
that have not been expressly made the subject of an exception.™ In view of
the outcome in the US in Kirtsaeng 2 John Wiley & Sons, the contested position
in respect of the book regime, and, the overall complexity of the whack-a-
mole array of exceptions, a worthy reform proposal is that put forward by the
Intellectual Property Competition Review of 2000 simply to do away with the
current exceptions-based approach by removing all grey goods from the scope
of actionability under ss 37, 38, 102 and 103.**

76 Liability relating to technical protection measures
7.6.4 Background

The Digital Agenda Reforms inserted new causes of action for copyright
owners and their exclusive licensees that are not copyright infringement, but
rather adjunct statutory torts which in current law span three distinct types
of activities as explained below. As originally enacted in the Digital Agenda
Reforms, there were only two types of liability: that relating to supply of
circumvention devices or services and that relating to tapering with rights
management information. Liability relating to actual circumvention of access
controls was only added in the wake of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement
and after Sackville J of the Federal Court had at trial in the Sony PlayStation Case
interpreted the original supply liability as not applying to access controls.

This new species of liability for compromising technical (self-help) meas-
ures adopted in copyright-dependent industries was controversial to some
upon its introduction. Justice Kirby, when the Sony PlayStation Case was before
the High Court, went so far as to muse that the laws could amount to such “an
impermissible inhibition” upon the exercise of rights in chattel property which
created constitutional concerns.’ However, in an internet age the creation of
such protection seems unremarkable. Indeed James Gleick had predicted in
1996:

When the coming technologies of on-line commerce allow easy payment
of small sums, a few cents here and a few cents there, people who create
writing or music or art of value will flourish economically in ways that have
been impossible until now - independent, perhaps, of traditional publishers
and media empires. But that will be impossible if at the moment a new work
reaches the on-line world, it becomes everyone’s common property.

The twin realities of the otherwise uncontrollable nature of the unauthorised

distribution of much content online, coupled with the movement away from

the physical copy-based distribution of subject matter (e.g. the sale of news-
papers and the rental of DVDs) towards the experiencing of subject matter
online on a payment-for-use basis (e.g. subscriptions to news publishers and
to streaming services such as Netflix), has led to the reliance on technical
measures. That is, such measures both restrain unauthorised online distribu-
tion and provide a mechanism by which consumer payment can be required
in exchange for online access. The US drove the insertion of articles into the

WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) that obliged the creation of such liability as a

minimum standard, and in relation to Australia, the US doubled-down with

more specific obligations in the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement.*® Thus,
the current Australian regime can be understood as being informed by both
WCT obligations and those in the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement - the
latter being particularly informed by the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act

reforms.

7.6.2 Regime overview

The causes of action sit in Division 2A of Part V of the 1968 Act and included.
within the Division itself are the remedies available for the causes of action.”
It is instructive to consider these statutory causes of action in the Division as
akin to the causes of action conferred upon performers in Part XIA. However,
that Part expressly stipulates that the rights of performers to bring such actions
are not assignable." No similar stipulation is made in Division 2A which leads
to some questions around the alienability of the rights as cause of action as
distinct from the related copyright subject matter. It seems that at least in
the case of assignment of copyright, the assignee should be eligible to have
assigned to it any causes of action that had accrued to the assignor under the
Division”
The three types of action can be understood as follows:
+ First, rights holders whose subject matter is protected by technologi-
cal measures that control access (such as technology that confines a
subscriber s access to a particular device) have a cause of action against
those who knowingly circumvent those measures.” The liability relat-
ing to access control circumvention is subject to far more exceptions
than any other liability in the regime. These are 19 in total and relate
mostly to institutional users: libraries, archives, educational institutions
and broadcasts. They do not include fair dealing exceptions except the
provision of access by or for persons with a disability to “copyright
material other than a computer game” 7+
* Second, rights holders whose subject matter is protected by techno-
logical protection measures, whether these measures merely control
access or exercises of exclusive rights attached to the copyright, have
causes of action against those who knowingly supply circumven-
tion devices or circumvention services for a technological protection
measure — whether it be an access control or a measure that controls

“the doing of an act com; in the copyright” ” The definitions of
such devices or services span things that are: (a) promoted as having
the purpose of circumventing; (b) have limited commercial purpose
other than circumvention; or (c) are essentially produced to facilitate
circumvention.’ There are five exceptions for circumvention device
supply and two for circumvention service supply.

+ Third, rights holders whose subject matter is tagged with electronic
rights management information (such as embedded digital watermark-
ing) have rights of action against those who knowingly: (i) remove or
alter that information; (ii) distribute or communicate subject matter
after such removal or alteration; (iii) distribute the removed or altered
information.” All three species of liability related to electronic rights
management information are subject to only one exception relating to
national security and law enforcement purposes.”

The regime is summarised in Table 7.1 opposite. For all causes of action reme-
dies include injunctive relief, damages or an account of profits, and “additional
damages” and circumvention liability includes the explicit remedial option of
delivery up of circumvention devices:

7

7.6.3 Circumvention

The trial and High Court decisions in the Sony PlayStation Case can be under-
stood as a form of judicial resistance to legislative policy, a resistance which
was largely swept away by a more emphatic statement of legislative intent.
As explained in Chapter 6 (see: 6.2.4) the Sony PlayStation considered in
the litigation was a computer console which, when connected to a television,
permitted its operator to play video games. The video games were contained as
computer programs on game discs; items of media separate from the console.
Each game disc comprised a reproduction of a computer program literary
work and encoded by that program was a copy of an interactive audio-visual
game ~ a cinematograph film in Australian copyright law. The game disc was
a form of storage termed “read only memory”, known more commonly by its
acronym, ROM. Integrated circuitry within the console precluded the game
disc from interoperating with the console unless an encrypted access code
on the disc was recognised. This integrated circuitry (which itself embodied
its own computer code) was referred to as the “boot ROM”, where “boot”
is a computing term which means to cause a computer to start the initial
processes. The access code was present on all Sony-authorised game discs. The

nature of the encryption was such that if an authorised game disc was copied
(using “burning” conventional technology) without Sony’s authorisation, all
copyright subject matter would be perfectly reproduced or copied, but not
the access code. Without the access code the disc could not boot and thus the
unauthorised copy disc would not be playable on a PlayStation console. The
interoperation of the encrypted code with the boot ROM was the Sony system
under judicial consideration. The defendant commercially supplied and
installed a device (the modchip) which modified the consoles so as to defeat the

operation of the Sony system: once Stevens had performed the modification,
unauthorised disc copies on which no access code was present would boot.
The issue of consequence before the courts was whether the Sony system
was a “technological protection measure” as then defined in the initial Digital
Agenda enactment of the regime. If it was such a measure there was liability
~ the defendant was supplying devices and services that had limited purpose
other than the circumvention of the Sony system. The only way the defendant
could escape liability was to establish that the Sony system was not a techno-
logical protection measure. The relevant definition provided that:
technological protection measure means a device or product, or a component
incorporated into a process, that is designed, in the ordinary course of its
operation, to prevent or inhibit the infringement of copyright in a work or
other subject-matter by either or both of the following means:

(a) by ensuring that access to the work or other subject matter is
available solely by use of an access code or process (including
decryption, unscrambling or other transformation of the work or
other subject-matter) with the authority of the owner or licensee of
the copyright;

(b) through a copy control mechanism.”

In this definition, the Sony system most obviously operated by the means
described in paragraph (a). However, Sackville J at trial and a unanimous
High Court on final appeal found that the Sony system did not satisfy the
threshold purpose-based requirement of being designed “to prevent or inhibit
the infringement of copyright”, and as such no liability could ever attach for
the supply of any device or service which circumvented the system. These
judges considered that the prevention or inhibition of infringement must arise
causally from an end-user’s submission to the access control. The mere deter-
rence of infringement by rendering unauthorised copies of game discs made
by a third-party inutile was not sufficient to satisfy the definition”

In the current law a “technological protection measure” (TPM) is defined
to mean in paragraph (a) an “access control technological protection measure”
(ACTPM) or paragraph (b):

a device, product, technology or component (including a computer
program) that -

() is used in Australia or a qualifying country by, with the permis-
sion of, or on behalf of, the owner or the exclusive licensee of the
copyright in a work or other subject-matter; and

(i) in the normal course of its operation, prevents, inhibits or restricts
the doing of an act comprised in the copyright

Under the holding in the Sony PlayStation Case it would seem that this TPM
type (b) would likely not capture the Sony system at (ii) for the reason under
the interpretation given to such language in the decision, the person subject to
such a TPM must be a person who is attempting to exercise an exclusive right
in the copyright and is inhibited by the operation of the TPM from infringing.
A measure which merely operates to deter third-party infringement - such as
the Sony system — would not be enough. An example of a measure within (ii)
was one specifically mandated in US law for analogue video cassette formats
such as VHS and Beta: Macrovision’s Analog Protection System. That copy
control technology meant that when making unauthorised video cassette
copies of pre-recorded cassettes (i.e. those distributed by film studios) the
resultant copies were treated in such a way that the copy was rendered in
play-back with a distorted or degraded display.*
However as stated above an ACTPM, a type of TPM within paragraph (a)

of the TPM definition is separately defined to mean:

a device, product, technology or component (including a computer

program) that:

(a) is used in Australia or a qualifying country:

(i) by, with the permission of, or on behalf of, the owner or the
exclusive licensee of the copyright in a work or other subject-
matter; and

(i) in connection with the exercise of the copyright; and
(b) in the normal course of its operation, controls access to the work or
other subject-matter

Here it seems quite likely that the Sony system would satisfy the ACTPM
definition because the purpose-based requirement is simply to control access.
The only room for argument might be whether the measure had been used by
the rights holder “in connection with the exercise of the copyright”. However,
the Explanatory Memorandum makes clear that examples of such a connection
are “when a measure is applied to a work by a copyright owner where they are
communicating the work to the public or where a copyright owner is making
copies of other subject-matter” and went on to explain that “[t]he use of the
measure must be connected to the exercise of an exclusive right by the owner of
the copyright in that work or other subject-matter” * In the context of the Sony

system, the encrypted access code being applied by Sony to the authorised
copies it produced seems to meet this aspect of the ACTPM definition. As such,
the activities of the defendant in the Sony PlayStation Case would likely amount
to the supply of devices or services (or both) that circumvent an ACTPM
contrary to the revised regime. Moreover, leaving aside the application of
the several exceptions, a customer of the defendant who then circumvents the
Sony system for their own access to the copyright subject matter (ie. in order
to run an unauthorised copy of a game disc) would likely also be committing
an act contrary to the revised regime.*>

7.6.4 Geo-blocks

As was explained above (see: 7.5.2), the public policy preference of Australian
law over the past few decades has been to gradually remove from the
Australian rights holder the legal ability to restrain the importation and
sale of grey goods (parallel imports). However, the question of geographic
market segregation has arisen anew in the internet age with debate around
so-called geo-blocks assuming a central place. For much copyright subject
matter the mass distribution of content can now be divorced from physical
goods that require delivery. Thus, content distributed to consumers by way
of books, newspapers, CDs and DVDs can be delivered online by making it
available for browsing, download or by streaming. A so-called “geo-block” is
a technological measure which is used to “block or limit a customer's access to
the trader's online interface for reasons related to the customer's nationality,
place of residence or place of establishment” and in 2018 such measures were
prohibited within the EU single market.” Likewise, in the same EU regulation,
an online trader is precluded within the single market from applying different
general conditions of access to goods or services (which includes “net sale
prices”) for reasons related to a customer's nationality, place of residence or
place of establishment."

The current definitions of ACTPM and TPM type (b) include devices,
products, technologies or components (including computer programs) “used
in Australia or a qualifying country”, where “qualifying country” is defined
to mean a party to Berne Convention or a WIO member.®” A geo-block access
control of the Netflix variety that is used in the USA and applied to restrict
access in Australia to streamed content that would otherwise be communicated
here most likely should satisfy the basic definition of an ACIPM, recalling
that the Communication Theory of jurisdiction for the communication right

appears to apply in Australian law (see: 7.2.4) and the definitional need for
there to be a “connection with the exercise of the copyright” 1°

A legislative attempt was made when the Australian regime was revised in
the wake of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement to curtail the possibility of
certain TPM protections being used to segment geographic markets, consistent
with public policy disdain for parallel importation controls. Excluded from.
the ACTPM and TPM type (b) definitions are measures which, if the work or
other subject matter is a cinematograph film or computer program (including
a computer game), control “geographic market segmentation by prevent-
ing the playback in Australia of a non-infringing copy of the work or other
subject-matter acquired outside Australia” * The Explanatory Memorandum
is explicit as to the type of excluded measures that were front of mind: region
coding measures which had become a standard adopted by DVD manufactur-
ers such that content is “coded for use in one of several regions and DVD
players can operate to play only DVDs from a given region” 1”? However the
exclusion from the ACTPM definition seems unlikely to apply to geo-blocks
of the Netflix variety, and indeed it was never intended to so apply as the
Explanatory Memorandum makes manifest that:

The exclusion is intended to apply to both electronic and hard copies of
copyright material acquired overseas where the measure prevents playback
in Australia. The exclusion is not intended to apply to geo-location or geo-
filtration measures. Those measures allow a copyright owner to control
who they make material available to on the basis of information such as a
customer's Internet portal address or credit card details. These measures
are not intended to be excluded because they block the initial acquisition of
material and do not fall within the scope of [the paragraph]. To be excluded
under [the paragraph] the measure must prevent playback of material that
has been acquired outside Australia not prevent the initial acquisition of mate-
rial outside Australia.*

When considering the Netflix paradigm in more detail, the exclusion from the

ACTPM definition is purposively confined to non-infringing physical copies

of cinematograph films “acquired” outside Australia. A copy here means any

article or thing in which the visual images or sounds of the film are embod-
ied.™ It seems clear enough that the exclusion in the ACTPM and TPM type

(b) definitions is confined to chattel acquisitions offshore and would not apply

on its face to a Netflix-streamed cinematograph film.

Thus technical geo-blocks of the Netflix variety, as they relate to Australia,
most likely comprise an ACTPM. Moreover, given the adoption in Australian
law of the Communication Theory of jurisdiction for the communication to the
public right, the use of the geo-block here by an actor such as Netflix may be
necessitated by its failure to own (or be licensed to exploit) the communication
to the public right in the Australian copyright territory for subject matter that it
can lawfully stream online into (say) the copyright territory of the USA” That
said it does not follow that a service, such as that of a Virtual Private Network
(VPN) provider, which permits Australian consumers to avail themselves of
the content intended to be streamed within a USA-confined footprint is neces-
sarily a circumvention service. To definitionally comprise a circumvention
service, the VPN service would need to be promoted by its provider as having
the purpose of circumventing the ACTPM or have limited purpose other than
the circumvention of the ACTPM or be primarily designed to circumvent the
ACTPM.** However, actual circumvention of an ACTPM of the Netflix variety
done by a person who knows or should know that their conduct will result
in its circumvention may result in liability if none of the relevant defences are
open.!”

7.6.5 Spare parts and repair

Finally, the definitions of ACTPM and TPM type (b) exclude measures which,
if the work is a computer program that is embodied in a machine or device,
restrict “the use of goods (other than the work) or services in relation to
the machine or device”. The Explanatory Memorandum makes clear the
intended effect is to exclude

measures which restrict the supply of spare parts by third parties or the
provision of repair or maintenance services by third parties in relation to
the machine or device. E.g., it is intended that there would be no protection
under the scheme for a measure used by a computer printer manufacturer

to restrict the use of generic cartridges in its printers. Similarly itis intended
that there would be no protection for a measure used by a garage door
manufacturer to prevent the use of remote control garage door openers
made by competitors. It is intended that protection would not be afforded.
to measures used by the providers of computer systems to restrict services
being provided by competing computer system maintenance providers.”

The use of an ACTPM or a TPM type (b) for collateral ends that would stifle
competition for consumable spare parts or after-sale servicing is plainly
regarded as not merely outside the intended protective scope of the regime,
but contrary to public policy.

7.6.6 Part VAA

The subscription broadcasting industry is the beneficiary of an analogous sui
generis regime in Part VAA. This regime applies to encoded (i.e. encrypted)
broadcasts and confers statutory rights of action on: channel providers (e.g.
National Geographic); parties with a copyright interest in a broadcast (e.g.
Foxtel) and parties with a copyright interest in the content of such a broad-
cast - ie. rights holder whose work or other subject matter is included in the
broadcast. These parties can bring action against those who knowingly and
without authority: (i) make or deal in unauthorised decoders; (ii) make decod-
ers (defined to include computer programs) available online; or (iii) gain access
to the broadcast in an intelligible form.** Encoded broadcasts dealt with in Part
VAA sit outside the general protections from circumvention that copyright
owners as a whole receive.”® The regime also confers a right of action on these
parties to take action against those who knowingly and without authority
“use the broadcast ... by way of trade or with the intention of obtaining a
commercial advantage or profit” - this final type of liability is unrelated

to decoding per se and quite the opposite of the position for broadcasts in
general.” The regime has only one exception insofar as it does not apply to
police action undertaken for “law enforcement or national security” °° The
remedial provision includes injunctive relief, damages or an account of profits,
and the possibility of “additional damages” .*”

7.7 Joint tortfeasor liability

Infringement of copyright and other causes of action under the 1968 Act (such
as rights under Part V Division 2A, Part IX and Part XIA) comprise statutory
torts and as a matter of general law there is no reason why joint tortfeasor
liability might not arise in a party whose own conduct is connected to another
wrongdoer’s conduct in a relevant way. This may be by being in a principal
and agent relationship, or by otherwise acting in concert pursuant to a common
design

In 2016 the Full Court considered whether a company director was a joint
tortfeasor with one of his companies in the commission of the statutory tort of
doing an act comprised in the copyright and a joint tortfeasor with another of
his companies in the statutory tort of that company in it authorising infringe-
ment” Having engaged in a lengthy examination of the potential liability
of company directors as joint tortfeasors of the wrongs committed by their
companies, the Full Court concluded that the proper test was whether the
conduct of the director can be said to go beyond the proper role of director
so as to descend into the realm of “close personal involvement” in the civil
wrong.” The Full Court then upheld the trial judge’s conclusions that on the
facts the relevant director was indeed a joint tortfeasor of the direct copyright
infringement of the first company and a joint tortfeasor of the infringement by
authorisation of the second company"

78 Groundless threats

Groundless threat liability exists in many statutory intellectual property
regimes and reflects a concern about the potential for a high number of spurious
infringement claims in the absence of such liability. Because it has long been
considered that general ignorance about intellectual property rights creates
the risk of bogus allegations to have anti-competitive effects, legal jeopardy in
those who make groundless threats of infringement should help minimise the
number of such allegations. Groundless threat actions permit the hunted to
become the hunter, and thereby bring matters to a head for resolution so that
trade can proceed with better legal clarity.

The 1968 Act contains two groundless threats provisions: one for threats
of infringement of copyright as personal property and another for threats of
action relating to causes of action for the circumvention of technological protec-
tion measures, but not for the removal or alteration of rights management
information, under Part V Division 2A.” The latter was added in 2006 after
the bolstering of that regime pursuant to US-Australia Free Trade Agreement
obligations. Notably there are no groundless threat provisions for the other
non-proprietary civil rights of action: moral rights or performers’ rights.

7.84 Threats of copyright infringement

Under s 202 a “person aggrieved” can seek an injunction and damages against
a person making threats of copyright infringement (whether or not that person
is the relevant copyright owner), unless the person making the threats (“by
means of circulars, advertisements or otherwise”) can establish “that the act
in respect of which the action was threatened constituted, or if done, would
constitute, an infringement of copyright”. A “person aggrieved” may be the
person threatened, but it is not confined to such a person. The concept extends
to “any person adversely affected by the threat or threats” such as a “supplier
to the recipient of a threatening letter of the goods the subject of the threat,
who loses sales or potential sales as a result of the letter”.

A person aggrieved, the plaintiff in a s 202 action, has an onus to establish
that the threats were made, after which the onus switches to the defendant to
demonstrate that the threats were justified. In Avel v Multicoin Amusements,
the threat of copyright infringement against Multicoin was levelled not by
the relevant US copyright owner, Williams, but by its Australian distribu-
tor, Avel.™* The High Court proceeded on the basis that it would suffice as a
defence to Multicoin’s s 202 action if Avel could establish that the conduct in
respect of which the threat was made would, if done, have constituted a breach
of copyright owned by Williams.”” As discussed earlier in this chapter (see: 7.3)

the majority concluded that the defence was not established because Williams
was indifferent to Multicoin’s importation of second-hand pinball machines.
That indifference meant that the distributor could not positively establish on
balance of probabilities that the importation occurred “without the licence”
(i.e. without the permission) of Williams.”*

Avel v Multicoin Amusements here is dealing with the issue central to
the scope of s 202 liability: what are “unjustifiable” threats? The statutory
logic is that any threat of copyright infringement is unjustifiable unless the
person making it can establish the relevant conduct constituted or would
constitute infringement of copyright. After the resolution of the main litiga-
tion in Telstra Corporation v Phone Directories Company discussed in Chapter 2
(see: 2.9.2) the successful defendant pursued a s 202 action against Telstra”
The groundless threat action failed because, at the time Telstra made the
threats in 2006, it had the solid basis of the Full Court decision in Telstra
Corporation v Desktop Marketing to assert its rights.“* While the High Court
decision in IceTV subsequently changed the landscape and largely swept that
authority away,” Murphy J's rejection of the groundless threat action was in
the following terms:

lam satisfied that on the law as it stood on 10 July 2006, Telstra’s threat of
copyright infringement was based on strong Full Court authority. It had
good legal grounds for asserting the rights against the cross-claimants that
it did. Although its claim of copyright infringement failed, I do not consider
that s 202 is aimed at deterring such an action. I cannot see Telstra’s conduct
in making the threat as an ‘abuse’ of the copyright regime, or a ‘threat in
the air’. Telstra’s letter of demand was not conduct of the kind that s 202 is
aimed at capturing. In my view, Telstra’s threats were not ‘groundless’ or
‘unjustifiable’ within the meaning of s 202.2
This is a departure from the strictness of an earlier approach applied by
Drummond J in 1998 which rejected the possibility that an unsuccessful
copyright plaintiff could defend a groundless threats action on the basis of
a bona fide belief that the conduct complained of constituted infringement.
Murphy J’s approach suggests that as a matter of principle, an unsuccessful
copyright plaintiff should not ipso facto have s 202 liability. However, in view
of the statutory language of s 202, Murphy J's holding might be only available
in unusual settings where a seismic shift in what constitutes infringement has
occurred after the threat was made - such as a High Court decision like IceTV
or some statutory provision such as s 22(6A) intended to have retrospective
(or declaratory) effect.

Section 202 makes clear that the mere notification of a right is not a threat,
and that a legal practitioner immunity exists - although that immunity relates
only to liability to the recipient under the provision for sending (say) a letter
of demand to that person and not to any liability to the client for professional
negligence attaching to underlying advice.** The section also, for the avoid-
ance of doubt, states that a defendant to a groundless threat action may as an
aspect of defending also apply to counterclaim for the copyright infringement
to which the threat relates.” The section also specifies that the actions for
copyright infringement include actions under s 116 discussed in Chapter 14
(see: 14.6.6) which creates a cause of action in conversion or detention in
relation to chattels which comprise infringements and devices (including
circumvention devices) used for making infringing copies.

Section 202 confers a right to seek remedy in declaratory relief, injunctive
relief and damages." An example of a damages award for recognisable loss
arising from a threat is Bell v Steele.’ Bell produced a film to be performed in
public as part of a national exhibition to promote Bell's latest series of visual
artistic works. Lawyers acting on behalf of Steele sent a letter of demand to Bell
asserting copyright infringement and insisting that the film’s public screenings
cease at the exhibition. While Bell complied with the demand, after the exhi-
bition had concluded, Bell brought a groundless threat action against Steele
which was not defended, and a default judgment was entered. On the question
of damages under s 202 Collier J accepted the proposition that recognisable
harm had been proven to have arisen from the making of threats which caused.
Bell to remove the film from his exhibition.” In the case this damage included.
reputational harm and lost sales.”

7.8.2 Threats relating to technological protection measures

The groundless threats cause of action in s 202A largely maps that in s 202
with two notable points of distinction. The first is that its scope is confined to
complaints about threats of action under Subdivision A of Part V Division 2A,
which are the causes of action related to the supply of circumvention devices
and circumvention services, and circumvention per se of access controls.” The
second is that a person who is a defendant to as 202A action may defend it on
the basis that an action under that Subdivision “has reasonable prospects of

success”. Establishing a “reasonable prospect of success” is a less onerous
burden on the defendant than establishing (as is required of a s 202 defend-
ant) that targeted conduct constituted or would constitute “infringement of
copyright”.

