10.1 Introduction

This chapter deals with six areas of general free exceptions from liability for
copyright infringement: (i) implied licences; (ii) fair dealing; (iii) miscellaneous
artistic work exceptions; (iv) the design/ copyright overlap exceptions for artis-
tic works; (v) exceptions related to computer programs; and (vi) private use.
When considering some of the more particular forms of liability in Chapter 7
~ie. authorisation, dealing in articles and liability relating to technical protec-
tion measures - certain limitations and exceptions have already been set out,
such as those pertaining to the safe harbour regime (see: 7.4.2.2) and parallel
importation (see: 7.5.2). Chapter 9 has dealt with the remunerated exceptions
(statutory licences and Crown use) of the 1968 Act, which have a codified scope
of conditional operation catering to the needs of particular industries, actors
or purposes. The six exception types in focus here have a relevance across

a wide range of industries, actors and activities, and typically can apply in
respect of various forms of copyright liability including the primary exclusive
rights of reproduction and communication. Moreover their policy justifica-
tions are driven by wider concerns such as necessity to protect accrued rights,
social desirability and economic imperatives. The chapter will conclude with
a summary of the array of more targeted and specific free exceptions that
serve the needs of a variety of narrower activities and interest groups such as
libraries, archives, education and broadcasting.

It should be noted that while public policy concerns can and do shape
copyright exceptions, there is no negation of copyright based upon general
public policy considerations. Thus there is no statutory basis to suggest copy-
right does not subsist because the content of the relevant work or other subject
matter “offends against community values or standards” + Thus in litigation
exceptions are put as defences to infringement and not as counter-claims seek-
ing to “revoke” the plaintiff's copyright.

10.2 Implied licences
10.2.1 Overview

The term “implied licence” is something of a misnomer: it is more akin to an
estoppel that precludes copyright enforcement against a third party. It is thus
important to distinguish between the implied licence as a third-party exception
to copyright, and the implication of terms in a voluntarily contracted copyright
licence. The latter is an example of construing implied (unwritten) terms in a
contract to which parties are privy and is better considered within the rubric
of contract law. The former, considered here, is (like estoppel) unconstrained
by privity of contract and consideration. It can be seen as more connected to
the avoidance of third-party detriment. Its flexibility permits, in particular
circumstances, the judicial finding of a licence to exploit certain exclusive rights
of copyright subject matter by third parties. Although as will be explained,
such licences require establishing a necessity to protect accrued rights in those
third parties.

Thus, a copyright owner who sellsa printed knitting pattern which incorpo-
rates the owner's artistic work, any person who lawfully possesses a copy of the
patternis the beneficiary of animplied licence touse that pattern to knitatleastone
garment that reproduces the work. However, such an implied licence would not
extend to permit the person to mass produce that garment ona commercial scale

Similarly, and as discussed in Chapter 6 (see: 6.2.4), while ss 43B and 111B create
statutory exceptions for temporary reproductions and copies incidentally made
when a non-infringing item of digital media is used, such exploitations would
be highly likely to equally fall within the scope of an implied licence operating,
to the benefit of a person who lawfully possesses a copy of the media. More
complexity arises where architectural plans are prepared for an architect's
client for the purpose of use to obtain local government planning approval.
Does a third party who purchases the land from that client post-approval
receive the benefit of an implied licence to exploit the architect’s copyright
to construct the approved building? In the leading Australian cases, Beck v
Montana Constructions and Concrete v Parramatta Design & Developments, archi-
tect copyright-owners sought to restrain such third-party purchasers’ uses of
their plans.’ In both cases the copyright owners were unable to avoid findings
that the purchasers of the parcels of land received the benefit of an implied
licence - and in neither case was there any suggestion that the copyright owner
could summarily resolve the case by somehow revoking that licence. In effect
the courts in these cases are judicially creating by ad hoc and instant specific
free exceptions, licences which are irrevocable to the extent necessary to protect
accrued rights in relevant third parties.* As earlier observed in Chapter 8 (see:
8.5.3) in Concrete v Parramatta Design & Developments, Gummow ACJ stressed
that s 15 of the 1968 Act was important in understanding the operation in law
of implied licences insofar as it “encompasses cases where the existence and
scope of an effective licence is found in a consent binding the copyright owner
other than by reason solely of the principles of contractual consideration and

privity”?

10.2.2 Necessity and onus

Necessity to protect accrued rights in a relevant third party is the preeminent
criterion in determining whether a licence will be implied to the benefit of a
third party. So that while in Beck v Montana Constructions Jacobs J stated that
“the engagement for reward of a person to produce material of a nature which
is capable of being the subject of copyright implies a permission, or consent, or
licence in the person giving the engagement to use the material in the manner
and for the purpose in which and for which it was contemplated between the
parties that it would be used at the time of the engagement’ ’ there is a risk of
legal error if that statement is viewed in isolation from necessity.

The instances described above (see: 10.2.1) including Beck v Montana
Constructions itself, all involved third-party beneficiaries who took lawful
possession of tangible property for a particular use which might be said to be
supported by a legitimate expectation given the circumstances in each instance.
The knitting pattern to be used to knit a garment for personal use. The item of
digital media to be played in a car’s CD player with RAM_buffering for better
playback. The land with planning approval to be built on in accordance with
that approval. In each instance the enforcement of copyright to restrain the
particular use would cause detriment to the tangible property owner by seri-
ously undermining accrued rights in the acquisition of the tangible property.
Implied licences are necessary to the extent they avoid that detriment. This
explains why in cases such as Beck v Montana Constructions and Concrete
Parramatta Design & Developments those licences are irrevocable to that extent:
an implied licence has features that are akin to estoppel?

Therefore in Copyright Agency v New South Wales discussed in Chapter 4
(see: 4.4.2) the High Court could see little necessity (so understood) to support
the New South Wales government's argument that it was a beneficiary of an
implied licence when surveyor’s plans were lodged with its land title office.
The New South Wales position was that a necessary incident of the lodgment
of the plans was an implied licence “binding on the owners of copyright in
the plans, to do everything that it is required to do under the statutory and
regulatory framework which governs such plans” # While that argument had
been accepted by the Full Federal Court, a unanimous High Court rejected it.
This rejection was on the basis that the existence in the 1968 Act of the s 183
remunerated exception that facilitated New South Wales government copy-
right exploitation and discussed in Chapter 9 (see: 9.5.6) rendered unnecessary
the recognition of an implied licence on the basis put by New South Wales.

After Copyright Agency » New South Wales a dispute between two competi-
tors who produced material safety data sheets (MSDS) for commercial clients
put more focus on the meaning of “necessity” in the context of copyright
implied licences. In Acohs v Ucorp the plaintiff, Acohs, alleged that the defend-
ant, Ucorp, had infringed its copyright by making “library” (or file) copies of
the MSDS it had produced and that had been supplied by Acohs to clients
— clients who had now become clients of the defendant. This was done by
Ucorp to provide a better service for those new clients. The trial judge first
found an implied licence attaching to the MSDS protected the defendant's use
of the Acohs-produced MSDS by applying the statement quoted above from
Beck v Montana Constructions: the licence permitted the MSDS to be used “in
the manner and for the purpose in which and for which it was contemplated

between the parties that it would be used” * Second, the trial judge noted that
the “licence point having been raised by [Ucorp], Acohs accepted that it bore
the onus of proving that each reproduction ... was done without its licence,
[Acohs] accepted the onus of proving the absence of a licence” 4 On these bases
Jessup J at trial was not satisfied the plaintiff, Acohs, had established that the
defendant's use of the MSDS that Acohs had produced for its former clients
was outside of an implied licence attaching to those MSDS.” The Full Court
forcefully rejected both the existence of the type of implied licence found by
the trial judge and the trial judge’s approach to onus. First it observed that in
light of Copyright Agency v New South Wales, the decision in Beck » Montana
Constructions “must be read subject to the requirement that a licence will
only be implied when there is a necessity to do so” 1° No reason of necessity
existed to justify why any implied licence attaching to the Acohs-produced
MSDS extended to Ucorp’s reproduction of them in anticipation of receiving
a request from a customer: convenience did not equate to necessity.” Second,
the Full Court placed the onus of establishing an implied licence squarely on
any defendant who pleads such a licence by way of defence: it was not on the
plaintiff to establish the absence of a licence. Such an approach marks out the
implied licence as a discrete defence and a special setting in which its establish-
ment as a matter of proof rests with the defendant. This removes the implied
licence from the general principle in infringement cases discussed in Chapter 7
(see: 7.3, 7.4.1.3 and 7.5.1.2) and Chapter 8 (see: 8.5 and 8.5.2) in which whether
an act was done “without the licence of” a copyright owner plaintiff is a matter
that must be established by that plaintiff

10.2.3. Qualifications upon implied licences

Some concluding (and limiting) comments on implied licences should be made.

First, the 1986 House of Lords decision in British Leyland Motor Corporation v
Armstrong Patents put forward a non-derogation from grant theory of copyright
exception to the reproduction right that facilitated repair by the making of spare
parts: in the case a car exhaust pipe” The theory put forward in British Leyland
‘Motor Corporation has been conspicuously not endorsed by Gummow AC] and

has been more fundamentally questioned by Lord Hoffmann. The theory is
not Australian law. Moreover the car spare parts that were in issue in British
Leyland Motor Corporation would, in Australian law, invariably fall within the
clutches of the Division 8 of Part III copyright/design overlap regime to be
discussed (below see: 10.5) and any rights in the form of such objects would
almost be confined to registered design protection under the Designs Act
2003 (Cth). By s 72 of that 2003 Act there exists a broad statutory exception to
registered designs protection to make and commercially exploit spare parts.

Second, in 2020 a High Court bare majority in Calidad v Seiko Epson accepted
an exhaustion principle applies to product patent exploitation rights under
the Patents Act 1990 (Cth). In so doing it rejected a separate implied licence
theory that pertained to patent law and was derived from a 1911 Privy Council
decision. Gageler J, who comprised a member of the majority, distilled the
new Australian exhaustion doctrine as it applies to the Patents Act 1990 in
these terms:

It involves nothing more than construing the references to ‘hire’, ‘sell’,
‘otherwise dispose of’, ‘use’ and ‘import’ in the definition of ‘exploit’ in
relation to an invention as having no application to a product in relation
to which the patentee has already exploited the invention by exercising the
patentee’s common law right to sell the product *
Because of the breadth of product patent rights as they are expressed in the
1990 Act, a breadth which vastly eclipses the nature of the exclusive rights in
copyright, the adoption of the exhaustion in patent law for product patents has
no clear relevance to the copyright implied licence which stands quite separate
as a matter of practical application and theory.”

Third, there is appellate authority that the implied licence may be excluded
at the outset by contract, an issue that also arises when considering fair dealing
(below see: 10.3.3). In its 1993 decision in Devefi v Mateffy Perl Nagy the Full
Court accepted that an implied licence of the type that arose in Beck v Montana
can be excluded by express contractual terms between the contracting site

owner-developer and the author of the building plans.” In that case the initial
site owner-developer had executed contractual terms with an engineer which
were inconsistent with a third-party acquirer of the site having the right to
exploit the copyright in the engineer's drawings - e.g. “Neither the consulting,
engineer nor the client shall assign, sublet or transfer any right or obligation
under the agreement without the written consent of the other party”.” The Full
Court held that because the parties had expressly dealt with the area covered
by the implied licence “in a manner at variance with it”, it was “superseded
or supplanted” by those express terms.* However, whether such terms could
apply to negate an implied licence operating to the benefit of a third party
who was neither privy to them nor had notice of them, and had acted in a
reasonable way that would occasion detriment if the copyright were enforced,
is far from certain.”

Finally, implied licences are a private law overlay on the 1968 Act which,
as a fully codified regime, is public law. As such where the clear operative
effect of a provision or provisions, or their manifest purpose, precludes the
finding of such an implied licence it is beyond judicial capacity to properly
find one. Thus, in the 1977 parallel importation case Interstate Parcel Express v
Time-Life International (Nederlands) the existence of s 37 under the regime then
extant and discussed in Chapter 7 (see: 7.5.2) made it impossible for the High
Court to countenance the existence of any implied licence in the purchaser to
import to Australia a commercial supply of books lawfully purchased offshore.
As Jacobs J said in relation to s 37: “The purpose of the section is to deal with
the case where no positive licence has been given and its purpose would be
defeated if mere absence of restriction were held to import a licence.”*

10.3. Fair dealing
10.3.1 Historical roots

An 1878 Royal Commission on Copyright included a “Digest of the Law of
Copyright” that was prepared by one of the commissioners - Sir James Stephen
- which purported to provide in positivist terms a “correct statement of the
law as it stands” * The necessity for the Digest - in effect an 1878 restatement
of the law of English copyright - arose in part from the then inchoate state of
English copyright law at a time prior to the 1911 Act which was to modernise

the law within the discipline of the 1908 revision to the Berne Convention.”
It is significant then that in art 9 of the 1878 Digest four heads were specified
as potentially qualifying as “the fair use of a book” which might not comprise
infringement. These were: (i) use of information or ideas in the book “without
copying its words or imitating them so as to produce what is substantially a
copy”; (ii) taking extracts from a book that are “reasonable in quality, number
and length, regard being had to the object with which the extracts are made
and to the subjects to which they related”; (iii) using a book on a particular
subject as a “guide to authorities” independently consulted by the author
of another book on the same subject; and (iv) using a book on a particular
subject “for the purpose of checking the results” independently arrived at by
the author of another book on the same subject ° These four heads were largely
derived from case authorities. The first head - idea/ expression dichotomy — is
absorbed into modern law not so much within the fair dealing exception but
as a doctrinal fundament of any liability buttressed by s 14 in the 1968 Act.
The second head - the taking of extracts - touches upon several modern fair
dealing exception purposes, and also relates to current reform claims (below
see: 10.3.10) for an additional quotation fair dealing exception. The third and
fourth heads - use of a book as a source - both pertain most obviously to
research or study fair dealing in modem law.

In 1878, the same year of the publication of the Copyright Royal
Commission report, Lord Hatherley in Chatterton v Cave re-framed the whole
area of such exceptions:

Books are published with an expectation, if not a desire, that they will be
criticised in reviews, and if deemed valuable that parts of them will be used.
as affording illustrations by way of quotation, or the like - and if the quan-
tity taken be neither substantial nor material, if, as it has been expressed by
some Judges, “a fair use” only be made of the publication, no wrong is done
and no action can be brought*
At this time statutory copyright in books required a specific form of local first
publication for subsistence, and the unmistakable logic underpinning this
is one of social contract: intangible property rights in authorship may arise
by statute from due book publication, but the reward for that publication is
qualified in ways other than merely term duration.

10.3.2 Adoption by the 1968 Act

These common law concepts took on a codified form in s 2 of the 1911 Act
which stated that a “fair dealing” with any work for the purposes of private
study, research, criticism, review, or newspaper summary shall not constitute
an infringement of copyright. This provision was elaborated upon at some

length by the Gregory Committee, and in the 1956 UK Act more detailed
fair dealing provisions were enacted for works.* In these provisions lay the
substance of the three purposive fair dealing exceptions that were included
in the 1968 Act on its first enactment: (1) research or private study; (2)
criticism or review,” (3) reporting of news. These applied initially only to
Part III works until being extended to Part IV subject matter first in 1980 to
published editions alone,* then in 1986 criticism or review and reporting
news exceptions were applied to all Part IV subject matter types® and in
1989 the research or study exception was also applied. It is important to
highlight that since 1986 the defences have applied to Part IV subject matter
largely by reference to the defined term “audio visual item”, defined to mean
“a sound recording, cinematograph film, a sound broadcast or a television
broadcast”? The “audio visual item” fair dealing exceptions in Part IV havea
deep reach: they provide in each case that a “fair dealing with an audio-visual
item does not constitute infringement of copyright in the item or in any work
or other audio-visual item included in the item”. In contrast, the published.
edition fair dealing exception, first introduced in 1980, “piggy-backs” on the
operation of the Part II fair dealing provisions: if a reproduction of the work
included the edition falls within a fair dealing exception, any facsimile copy
of the edition made in the course of that reproduction is within a mirroring
exception.

In 1980 the first addition to the fair dealing purposes occurred:
(4) fair dealing (of works only) for the purpose of giving professional legal
advice.* Then in 2006 the (5) parody or satire fair dealing purpose (arguably
a particular type of criticism or review) was added for both works and other
subject matter.** In Part IV this exception deploys the concept of “audio visual
item” discussed immediately above.

The most recent addition was in 2017: (6) fair dealing for the purpose
of a person with a disability having access to either a work or other subject
matter was added.” This fair dealing purpose sits in a separate Part IVA and
adopts its own drafting logic based on a definition of “copyright material” that

takes account of all Part III and Part IV subject matter. As discussed below
(see: 10.3.10) in 2020 the Commonwealth government signalled a desire to
introduce a seventh fair dealing exception for the purpose of “quoting copy-
right material”, which at the date of writing remained unenacted.”

10.3.3 Framing issues: “dealing”, “fair” and contractual
exclusion

In the 1968 Act the meaning of a “dealing” for fair dealing purposes is undefined
but should be understood in the most open-textured way possible: the doing
of anything (ie. direct exploitation, authorisation or dealings with articles)
which would otherwise give rise to copyright liability for infringement of the
economic rights in Part III or Part IV of the 1968 Act.

A more difficult issue is what is “fair” here. The UK Court of Appeal in
Pro Sieben v Carlton UK Television has suggested that it would be desirable
if expressions in the 1988 UK Act such as “fair dealing with a work for the
purpose of criticism or review, of that or another work or of a performance of
awork” or “fair dealing with a work (other than a photograph) for the purpose
of reporting current events”, should be treated “as a single composite whole
and to resist any attempt at further dissection”. While this has appealing
breadth and flexibility, it is not the approach to date in modern Australian
law. As will be explained, the Australian fair dealing defences for research or
study and the provision of access for people with disabilities, have statutory
laundry lists of “fairness factors” which are largely identical although only the
former directs attention to the possibility of commercial obtainment.* While
confined to those two defences, the research or study list of factors has been
recently relied upon by courts in parody or satire fair dealing cases.” Those
five factors are:

(1) the purpose and character of the dealing;

(2) the nature of the work or audio-visual item;

(3) the possibility of obtaining the work or audio-visual item within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price;

the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or value of, the
work or audio-visual item; and

4)

(5) inacase where part only of the work is reproduced or part only of an
audio-visual item is copied - the amount and substantiality of the part
copied taken in relation to the whole work or item.*

There have been repeated calls for reform to make a uniform, generalised list.
Of all the factors, the fourth is perhaps the most significant factor for published
material.* For example, if there is no market or commercial supply and no
imminent market or commercial supply that will serve those in society who
are the intended beneficiaries of a particular fair dealing purpose, to argue that
a dealing is not fair when it steps into the breach and serves that constituency
is a priori not an easy argument to make good. However, as the cases reveal
there is a high degree of indeterminacy at play in the fair dealing decisions
regardless of whether or not the factors are used.

Another not fully resolved question is whether or not a contract is
enforceable to the extent it creates contractual liability in respect of conduct
that would otherwise comprise fair dealing.* In 2002 the CLRC recommended
that the 1968 Act “be amended to provide that an agreement, or a provision
of an agreement, that excludes or modifies, or has the effect of excluding or
modifying, the operation of” the fair dealing exceptions (among several other
exceptions) should have “no effect”.*” This was a recommendation supported
by the ALRC in its 2013 Report for fair dealing, but paradoxically not for its fair
use proposal.® To date this reform proposal has not been enacted. At present,
and to be discussed (below see: 10.6.1), the only provision in the 1968 Act that
negates contractual terms excluding free copyright exceptions relate to the
computer program exceptions.”

10.3.4 Research or study

For the first decade (or so) of the 1968 Act's life, s 40 simply stated that a fair
dealing with a work “for the purpose of research or private study does not
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work” .® In University of New
South Wales v Moorhouse discussed in Chapter 7 (see: 7.4) and Chapter 9
(see: 9.4.1) which concerned authorisation liability arising from the use of

photocopiers in the belly of a university library, there were judicial assump-
tions about the limits of the defence. The trial judge, Hutley J observed that:

It was suggested by the university that as users of the library were students
the university was entitled to assume that what was taking place was at
all times a fair dealing within the meaning of s 40, and that therefore no
precautions were needed to be taken by it beyond informing students of
the responsibilities under the Copyright Act. It would, in my opinion, be
pressing judicial naivete to inordinate lengths to so find. The opportunities
presented by the library and the means of copying a whole work creates
too real a temptation to any person who wanted it to permit this optimistic
conclusion. Temptation plus uncontrolled opportunity to yield to it does
not produce compliance with the restraints imposed by the requirement of
fair dealing?

In the High Court Gibbs J simply observed that the copies made by Paul

Brennan, who was a “trap copier” undertaking evidence gathering against

the defendant university:

[Wlere not made in circumstances that would give rise to the protection of
s 40; there was no evidence that Mr Brennan made them for the purpose of
research or private study but it appears to have been common ground that
they were made simply to provide evidence in proceedings intended to be
commenced against the University. Itis accordingly unnecessary to discuss
the meaning and scope of the expression ‘fair dealing” in s 40.
In the wake of the University of New South Wales 0 Moorhouse litigation, the
Commonwealth government appointed a Copyright Law Committee on
Reprographic Reproduction (known as the “Franki Committee” being chaired
by Justice Franki) to
examine the question of the reprographic reproduction of works protected
by copyright in Australia and to recommend any alterations to the Australian
copyright law and any other measures the Committee may consider neces-
sary to effect a proper balance of interest between owners of copyright and
the users of copyright material in respect of reprographic reproduction.
Its report led to two major areas of change in Australia law enacted in 1980:
(i) the reform to s 40 by omitting the word “private” before study, adding five
codified factors to guide its scope and inserting “deemed” fairness rules; and (ii)
the introduction, in then s 53B, of the first statutory licence regime authorising
copying for teaching by educational institutions of articles contained in periodi-
cal publications and other (essentially print-based) works. The former was to

give s 40 more predictive certainty for society as a whole and is discussed below;
the latter was to facilitate the educational use of photocopiers for the mass
reproduction of works for teaching and is discussed in Chapter 9 (see: 9.4.1).
The five codified factors to assist in assessing fairness for research or study
fair dealing have remained unchanged since their enactment in 1980 and have
applied in Part IV since 1989 reforms. They provide an inclusive list of matters
to which regard must be had in determining whether a dealing with a work
constitutes a fair dealing for the purpose of research or study and have been
summarised (above see: 10.3.3). Overriding these factors, are deemed fair-
ness rules, also first added in 1980. These were modernised with the Digital
Agenda Reforms in 2001, and again in a more cosmetic way in 2006, although
their essential logic has remained unchanged. They apply only in respect of
Part III works (not Part IV subject matter) aside from any “piggy-backing”
published editions) and provide that notwithstanding the codified factors,
reproducing the following quanta is “taken to be fair dealing” if done for the
purpose of research or study:
* the whole of any work contained in an article of a periodical;
* 10% of the pages of a published edition containing any work;
* 10% of the words of any literary work (excluding computer programs)
or dramatic work in published electronic form; and
+ asingle chapter where a literary or dramatic work in published elec-
tronic form or in a published edition is divided into chapters.
Shortly after the enactment of the reforms in 1980, the New South Wales
government instructed its schools by a July 1981 memo that “it is not compul-
sory to use” s 53B (the statutory licence) when photocopying, and that if you do
not use it “you could still rely on” s 40. This memo led to further authorisation
litigation in Copyright Agency v Haines.” An issue was whether there existed
any overlap between the purposes of “research or study” in s 40 and the
“teaching purposes” of an educational institution. The trial judge McLelland J
thought this unlikely:
it might be anticipated that a teacher who, even if he procured himself to
be appointed as agent for every member of his class, made multiple copies
for the purpose of classroom study, of substantially the whole of some
separately published book, or sheet music, the subject of copyright, would
not in ordinary circumstances be likely to be regarded as engaged in fair
dealing under section 40.
On appeal Fox J, writing for the Full Federal Court, put a finer point on the
distinction:
The purpose of s 53B is to permit, but also to control, the making of multiple
copies which modern means of reprographic reproduction have greatly
facilitated. It is contended that s 40 must nevertheless be given its full

effect. What the submission fails to take into account adequately is that
the essential ingredient of s 40 is fair dealing with a work for the purpose
of research or study. What is fair dealing is not fixed by reference to the
number of copies, but is to be determined by reference to the facts of each
case. An answer to the question must take into account the existence and
effect of s 53B ... Moreover, it is important to the proper working of the
sections that a distinction be recognized between an institution making
copies for teaching purposes and the activities of individuals concerned
with research or study.”

This all made clear one thing: “research or study” was tied to an individual's
own edification whereas “teaching purposes” were tied to an institution’s
function.

The “agency” theory of research or study fair dealing postulated (and
rejected) by McLelland J at trial in Copyright Agency » Haines has been consid-
ered (and similarly rejected) in two subsequent Australian cases. In De Garis
v Neville Jeffress Pidler a press-clipping service defendant argued that it could
qualify as a “media research bureau” by virtue of its system of retrieval of
material published in newspapers by reference to subject matter or because its
clients were themselves engaged in research. Beaumont J rejected the former
argument on the basis that although the system may be complex, the defend-
ant’s purpose was not research but merely “to supply a photocopy of material
already published in return for a fee” ” The latter argument was rejected in a
more far-reaching way. The relevant purpose must be that of the defendant
not its clients: “even if a customer were engaged in research, this would not
assist [the defendant]’. When the Copyright Agency v New South Wales (on
land surveyors’ copyright) dispute arrived at the point of s 183A royalty rate
determination before the Copyright Tribunal of Australia, the tribunal briefly
noted an abandoned argument put by New South Wales:

[I]t pointed to the fact that the end-users of registered plans in many cases
(indeed, on the evidence of the Registrar-General, nearly half of all cases)
were surveyors. Here it was submitted that the surveyors in preparing the
plans were engaged in activities such as, or analogous to, research and
study. It was nevertheless accepted in light of De Garis v Neville Jeffress Pidler
... that, even if that were so, the state could not satisfy the requirements of
s 40(1) (the relevant study and/or research having to be done by the party
in question rather than the end user).

Thus notwithstanding the omission of the word “private” from the defence in
1980 it appears well entrenched that the fair dealer must be the same person
who holds the relevant research or study purpose. However if all s 40 criteria
are met, there is no obvious reason why a body corporate undertaking research

(say) ought not be as capable of availing itself of the exception as a natural
person, especially when acting within the works limits that are “taken to be
fair dealing”.” Although outside the deeming provisions, how the five codified
factors might apply to an asserted fair dealing for research by (say) a high
school student as opposed to an asserted fair dealing for research by (say)
BHP Group Limited may lead to some variation in the application of the first,
third and fourth fairness factors given the likely differences between the two
settings.

10.3.5 Criticism or review

Since 1968 s 41 (its Part IV counterpart s 103A was enacted in 1986) has not
changed: a fair dealing with a work does not constitute an infringement of
the copyright in the work if it is for the purpose of criticism or review of that
work, or of another work, and a sufficient acknowledgement of the work is
made. There has been some quite detailed modern UK case law that has been
accepted in Australia and seems to confer upon the defence a degree of sensible
breadth and flexibility.

TCN Channel Nine v Network Ten” indicated that Australian law on the
scope of the criticism or review purpose adopted the principles set out in the
UK 1999 Court of Appeal decision in Pro Sieben Media v Carlton UK Television
which were accepted by both parties in the Australian case The UK statu-
tory language is essentially the same as the Australian language, and in TCN
Channel Nine the Full Court, upholding the trial judge and with the consensus
of both parties, accepted the Pro Sicben Media approach that “criticism and
review are words of wide and indefinite scope which should be interpreted
liberally” .”* However, care needs to be taken about the current status of Pro
Sieben Media in Australia in view of a 2021 first instance decision of Burley J
discussed below (see: 10.3.5.2).

10.3.5.1 Pro Sieben and contextual use

Pro Sieben represented the culmination of three earlier UK cases in which
the criticism or review purpose was considered: Hubbard v Vosper;” Beloff 0
Pressdram;® and Time Warner v Channel 4.” In each of these cases, the types
of fair dealing use in issue were for what might be loosely termed contextual
purposes: illustrative use in the context of a critique on something related to
the work, but not a critique on the work per se. The courts (either explicitly
or implicitly) placed a gloss on the UK statutory exception to accommodate
contextual criticism or review: each case involved dealing by a form of

“quotation” for a purpose of criticism or review of something touching on,
but beyond, the intrinsic aspects of the plaintiff's copyright subject matter.
Hubbard v Vosper involved quotations in Vosper’s book The Mind Benders
taken from the works of Hubbard, the founder of Scientology. An example
given in the judgment of Lord Denning MR, emphasising by italics the words
Vosper had taken from Hubbard, was:
..- Hubbard in his book Introduction to Scientology Ethics, 1968 states: A
Suppressive Person or Group becomes ‘Fair Game’. By Fair Game is meant, without
right for self, possessions or position, and no Scientologist may be brought before
a Committee of Evidence or punished for any action taken against a Suppressive
Person or Group during the period that person or group is ‘fair game’. Would a
Scientologist who takes it into his head to murder a declared Suppressive
Person be regarded by Scientologists as fully within his rights? That murder
has not occurred as far as is known, is not to the credit of L Ron Hubbard’s
Ethics but more to the credit of police and courts of the old-fashioned,
repressive type.”
The plaintiff's counsel argued that the defence of fair dealing is only available
toa defendant criticising or reviewing the plaintiff's literary work per se and it
is not available when “he is criticising or reviewing the doctrine or philosophy
underlying the plaintiff's work”* The UK Court of Appeal unanimously
rejected that submission. Lord Denning MR held: “Mr Vosper is entitled to
ctiticise not only the literary style, but also the doctrine or philosophy of
Mr Hubbard as expounded in the books” ® Criticism or review of Scientology
was a legitimate purpose to justify quotation from Hubbard’s various literary
works for the purposes of the fair dealing exception.
Beloff v Pressdram involved the in toto reproduction and publication in
a news periodical, Private Eye, of an internal unpublished memo written by
a journalist from a rival newspaper The Observer which set out her private,
off-the-record interactions with one government minister concerning another
government minister, Maudling. The memo had been leaked to the Private
Eye. The memo, as published, comprised one-quarter of the text of a Private
Eye article replying to an earlier article in The Observer which had attacked
coverage in Private Eye of aspects of Maudling’s business relations. Fair deal-
ing was dealt with in obiter by Ungoed-Thomas J because the plaintiff could
not establish copyright ownership.® It was not in dispute that the dealing
with the unpublished memo was for the purpose of criticism or review of
the attack article in The Observer. This purpose included a critique of its truth,
sources and “how it came to be written”. Criticism or review of the motiva-
tion underlying the attack article in The Observer was a legitimate purpose to
rely upon to quote the unpublished memo for the purposes of the fair dealing

exception. However, the fair dealing defence would have been found by
Ungoed-Thomas J to ultimately fail because the in toto publication of a leaked
unpublished work of a trade rival was considered by the court to be not fair.
It was clear enough that had Private Eye merely published a portion from the
memo and had the memo been prior-published in an authorised way, the
fairness evaluation would have been different.°
Time Warner v Channel 4 involved the copying of approximately 1242
minutes of the film A Clockwork Orange within a 30-minute television documen-
tary which concerned the long-standing decision of the plaintiff to withdraw
the film from public exhibition in the UK.* Henry LJ, writing as a member of
a unanimous Court of Appeal, endorsed an elastic approach to the fair dealing
defence as supporting the defendant's use of the footage:
The fair dealing defence may apply equally where the criticism is of the deci-
sion to withdraw from circulation a film in the public domain, and not just
of the film itself. In the present context the two are in my view inseparable.
That decision is clearly a suitable matter for public debate and so for public
criticism, and it is clearly highly relevant to that criticism to illustrate by
excerpts relevant qualities, whether positive or negative, of the film, so that
the public may form a view of the decision criticised and of what they are
missing or rightly being spared.”
Illustration from the film for the purpose of criticising or reviewing the decision
to prevent the film’s public exhibition was a legitimate purpose to rely upon.
Pro Sieben Media v Carlton UK Television is a unanimous Court of Appeal
decision which overturned a trial decision of Laddie J - an eminent copyright
specialist and copyright textbook writer. Pro Sieben had purchased the
“exclusive rights” to broadcast an interview with a Ms Allwood who was
expecting octuplets. After the broadcast had aired, Carlton used 30 seconds of
Pro Sieben footage as part of a television program on the practice of so-called
“chequebook journalism” and used the Pro Sieben broadcast as one of a
number of illustrative case studies. The defence of fair dealing for the purpose
of criticism or review failed at trial before Laddie J. In his judgment the trial
judge stated that:

The Act does not provide a general defence to the effect that it is permis-
sible to fairly deal in any copyright work for the purpose of criticising or
reviewing that work or anything else. The defence is limited to criticising
or reviewing that or another work ... It must be taken to be deliberately so
limited

Consistent with that statement, Laddie J found that the “defendants have failed
to discharge the onus on them to prove that the purpose of inclusion of the
clip, or any significant part of the purpose, was so as to criticize or review the
[Pro Sieben] program” .® This interprets the statutory language as precluding
criticism or review of anything other than a type of artistic or literary critique
or review of the plaintiff's copyright subject matter or some other specific
copyright subject matter. Such an interpretation confines the defence to criti-
cism or review of the work per se.

The Court of Appeal unanimously rejected the Laddie J view as inconsist-
ent with the earlier direction of authorities. It held that: “Criticism of a work
need not be limited to criticism of style. It may also extend to the ideas to be
found in a work and its social or moral implications.” Rather than emphasise
the words targeting the plaintiffs work or some other work, the Court of
Appeal de-emphasised those words and instead regarded “for the purpose of
criticism or review” as a broad composite expressed akin to “for the purpose
of argument”. Consistent with that broader approach, it found that:

The Carlton programme as a whole was ... made for the purpose of criticism
of works of chequebook journalism in general, and in particular the (then
very recent) treatment by the media of the story of Ms Allwood’s multiple
pregnancy.”
Overturning Laddie J in such an emphatic way on this issue has significance.
It makes manifest that any limited or conservative reading of the exception is
unfavoured. Criticism or review of the practice of chequebook journalism was
a legitimate purpose to rely upon to “quote” in an illustrative way from the Pro
Sieben broadcast for the purposes of the fair dealing exception.

10.3.5.2 The reception of Pro Sieben in Australia

This UK jurisprudence should be regarded as good Australian law in light
of its consensual acceptance by the parties and judiciary in TCN Channel
Nine v Network Ten.* It makes the criticism or review fair dealing defence
elastic enough to accommodate contextual illustration on a wide variety of
themes, topics and fields. As such the 2021 decision of Burley J in AGL Energy
v Greenpeace Australia Pacific that certain Greenpeace online posts communicat-
ing the plaintiff's corporate logo (artistic work) did not qualify as criticism or
review, seems anomalous. This was because, notwithstanding the acceptance
of the Court of Appeal in Pro Sieben by the 2021 Full Court in TCN Channel
Nine v Network Ten, Burley J took the view that it was “clear from the terms
of the section that the defence can only be used where the criticism or review
is of a work” 5 This was applied in one example where via Instagram the

defendant communicated the plaintiff's logo together with a lurid image of
what appears as coal-fired power station chimneys in full operation, and the
words “AGL Energy is Australia’s single largest climate polluter accounting
for 8% of Australia’s entire domestic emissions” °° Burley J reasoned that “the
images that bear the AGL logo do not rise above the level of protest state-
ments that are critical of AGL as a company, and would not be understood to
represent criticism or review, whether of the AGL logo or any other work” .””
This is the same reasoning that Laddie J had adopted in Pro Sieben Media v
Carlton UK Television at trial that was rejected by the Court of Appeal, and that
Court of Appeal decision had been adopted by the 2002 Full Court in TCN
Channel Nine v Network Ten. As such this aspect of Burley J’s reasoning must
be treated with care.

10.3.5.3 Consumptive or productive use

In Australian law, however, another significant choke point is whether the
asserted fair dealer is using the material for its own sake rather than as part
of a genuine illustrative use in the context of critique or review. In the 1980
decision in Commonwealth v John Fairfax, Mason J had held that the mere
presentation of hitherto unpublished government documents accompanied
by limited commentary designed to contextualise the documents and highlight
their key features was an insufficient “veneer” of criticism or review given
what was the overriding dominant purpose: to publish the plaintiff's secret
documents.® In De Garis v Neville Jeffress Pidler the salient facts of which have
been discussed (above see: 10.3.4) the defendant's process involved scanning
media for particular subjects according to the requests of subscribers and not to
the passing of a judgment as to the merit of the articles identified: the task was
locating rather than evaluating and therefore well outside of either criticism
or review.” In TCN Channel Nine v Network Ten, 17 seconds of footage of the
then Australian Prime Minister serenading an elderly famous ex-cricketer, Sir
Donald Bradman, taken from a television broadcast (“Midday Show”) of over
one hour's duration, was re-broadcast as the point of departure for comedic
commentary by a panel of humourists ina rival broadcast (“The Panel”). Was
this within the fair dealing purpose? The trial judge, and the Full Court major-
ity, considered it was not: the footage was shown for its own sake, either as
something worth seeing again, or for the benefit of those who had missed it
when it was originally broadcast.” The dissent by Finkelstein J in the Full
Court on this point is cogent:

‘The Panel’ replayed the Prime Minister singing. Members of ‘The Panel’
then made humorous, but disparaging, comments about the manner in

which the Prime Minister performed. It was suggested that Ms Kennerley
must be a Labor supporter because during a previous show she had also
made the Treasurer ‘look like an idiot’. Fair dealing is made out ... ‘The
Panel’ is undertaking a review of sorts of the ‘Midday Show’. Indeed, after
the excerpt was shown, there was a general discussion about Ms Kennerley’s
talents as the program’s host."
The observations by Finkelstein J here that the defence rested in a “realm of
decision-making where there is room for legitimate differences of opinion”
would not enthuse those who seek a higher level of predictive certainty in
copyright law.

10.3.5.4 Acknowledgment

The defence is conditioned upon a type of positive attribution obligation: suffi-
cient acknowledgment of the source work or audio-visual item.’ “Sufficient
acknowledgement” is defined in s 10(1) as an acknowledgment identifying the
work by its title or other description and, unless the work of an anonymous or
pseudonymous author (or the author had permitted no acknowledgment), also
identifying the author. In practice what might amount as “sufficient acknowl-
edgement” appears to be regarded as a loose, non-prescriptive requirement.
In Pro Sieben Media v Carlton UK Television the Court of Appeal accepted that
the inclusion of the plaintiff broadcaster's logo-watermark in the excerpts
used by the defendant broadcast would suffice. Burley J in AGL Energy v
Greenpeace Australia Pacific did not consider whether the defendant had satis-
fied the requirement.*® The author or authors of the artistic work appeared to
be anonymous employees of a brand development firm. The nature of the
plaintiff’ s work (its corporate logo) and the defendant's use thereof (reproduc-
tion and communication in a campaign of public scrutiny for political ends)
meant, recursively, that the nature of the use also involved acknowledgment.

10.3.6 Parody or satire

In 2006, as part of a reaction to both some of the outcomes in the TCN Channel
Nine v Network Ten case such as that just mentioned (above see: 10.3.5.3)
concerning the use of the footage of the Australian Prime Minister serenading
Sir Donald Bradman and a backlash to the adoption of aspects of US copyright
law as a consequence of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement, a decision
was made to better align Australian fair dealing with the scope of US fair use
by inserting a parody-based purpose. US case law had established and applied

parody as a fair use purpose in the 1990s, and the Australian government
was keen to ensure that “Australia’s fine tradition of poking fun at itself and
others will not be unnecessarily restricted”.’” Rather than confine the new
purpose to parody, satire too was included with the distinction between the
two purposes explained in the following terms in a post-enactment Attorney-
General’s Department publication:

Satire often involves attacking an idea or attitude, an institution or a social
practice, through irony, derision, or wit. Parody often involves the imita-
tion of the characteristic style of an author or a work for comic effect or
ridicule.
Another way of thinking about this distinction is: satire uses the source material
as a weapon to attack something beyond the material; parody targets its source
material with mockery. US fair use had admitted only the latter, whereas in
s41A (its Part IV counterpart, s 103AA for audio-visual items, was simultane-
ously enacted) provides that a fair dealing with a work does not constitute an
infringement of copyright in the work “if it is done for the purpose of parody
or satire”. The placement of this defence in the legislative schema, nested after
criticism or review fair dealing, helps to colour its intended operation. Indeed
in TCN Channel Nine v Network Ten it was stated by Hely J that criticism “may
involve an element of humour, or ‘poking fun at’ the object of the criticism”,
so that no mutual exclusivity between the two defences should exist”

After a decade of no judicial consideration of the defence three single-
instance decisions have emerged, the first in 2017 and the other two in 2021.
In Pokémon Company International v Redbubble Pagone J considered the artistic
Pikachu work (a cartoon character) which had been mashed-up in various
ways. To give one example, the Pikachu character had been mashed-up to
appear wearing a Jason Vorhees style of Friday the 13th ice-hockey mask and
wielding a knife and standing beside a calendar page rendering the ominous
date - imagery then to be applied decoratively upon consumer merchandise
such as T-shirts.° Pagone J bluntly rejected such uses qualified for the s 41A
defence:

None of the examples relied upon as parodies or satires were shown to be
uses of the Pikachu work for the purpose of parody. Each, rather, appears on
its face to be a use of the Pikachu work for profit. That some of the infringing

works may be humorous, or even satirical or parodies, does not establish
that the use was for a purpose where it may fairly be concluded that the
purpose was parody or satire, but rather the commercial exploitation of the
original work in modified form."
This is a rigid approach to the defence. It is a far cry from the 1998 US decision
in Leibovitz v Paramount Pictures Corporation where the Second Circuit of the
US Court of Appeals unanimously found a rank commercial use (on a major
motion picture’s promotional poster) of the plaintiff's artistic work qualified
as fair use parody.*”

In Universal Music Publishing v Palmer, the plaintiff's musical work and
associated lyrics had been reproduced in modified form and incorporated into
a series of audio-visual “spot” advertisements for the United Australia Party
(UAP).** Katzmann J found that even if some of those advertisements might
have visually (or objectively) qualified as parody or satire, the music and lyrics
were found not to have been used for any such purpose. Rather Katzmann J
found that the only purpose for the use of the music and lyrics was as a political
party anthem: “the sole purpose to which the copyright works were put was
to underscore the UAP’s key campaign message and to rally the faithful and
the disaffected to the UAP’s cause”. The history of the dispute where there
was an unwillingness by the defendant to pay a licensing fee for the use of
the musical work and lyrics clearly served to reveal the use as pure political
promotion.”

In AGL Energy v Greenpeace Australia Pacific the defendant had appropriated.
the logo of the plaintiff for a political campaign targeting the plaintiff.1° The
defendant's brief to its advertising agency was candid about the campaign’s
purpose:

We will expose the underbelly of AGL’s business model, revealing their
significant climate, environmental and health impacts and greenwashing.
We'll build on this to launch a full-scale brand ‘realignment’ campaign,
removing their social license and making their brand toxic.
The plaintiffs brand logo which featured both the initials A G L (which have
provenance as an acronym of the 19th century Australian Gas Light Company)
and a graphic (which evokes rays of light or beams of energy emanating
from those initials) was deployed in the defendant's online, social media and
street poster campaign against the plaintiff. Often, but not always, the logo
was reproduced or communicated in conjunction with the derogatory line:
“Australia’s Greatest Liability” or “ Australia’s Greatest Liability.com”, the
latter being a direction to the campaign's website. The quite loose tag of “the

modified AGL logo” was given by Burley J to when these disparaging words
were added to the plaintiff's logo.” Burley J held that, notwithstanding the
manifest political purpose of the defendant's use, it qualified as parody or
satire (“it is unnecessary to distinguish between parody on the one hand and
satire on the other”"*) whenever the logo was used in conjunction with the
disparaging words “ Australia’s Greatest Liability” or “Australia’s Greatest
Liability.com”. The crux of the reasoning was:

The modified AGL logo is immediately juxtaposed by a play on the compa-
ny’s initials ‘AGL’ with the parodic or satirical words ‘Australia’s Greatest
Liability’, accompanied by words decrying AGL's environmental practices,
such as ‘Still Australia’s Biggest Climate Polluter’ or ‘Generating Pollution
for Generations’ or the like. The setting mimics elements used in AGL’s
Brand Guidelines, thereby creating a ‘corporate look’ about the Greenpeace
images that also juxtaposes the AGL corporate branding style with an obvi-
ously non-corporate message, creating an incongruity that is striking to
the viewer. The ridicule potent in the message is likely to be immediately
perceived. It is stronger in the image of the young person with the goggles
and mask, for example in the street posters. Many would see these uses of
the modified AGL logo as darkly humorous, because the combined effect
is ridiculous. AGL is exposed to ridicule by the use of its corporate imagery
including by use of the modified AGL logo to convey a message that AGL
would not wish to send. Furthermore, the words ‘Presented by Greenpeace’
are positioned closely proximate to the modified AGL logo. Anyone reading
the message would understand that the company held up for criticism as
Australia’s Greatest Liability is not the author of the message. The viewer
would understand that the message came from Greenpeace.”

Conversely, and with one exception, whenever the defendant had used the
plaintiff's logo absent the derogatory words the parodic or satirical purpose
was also absent on Burley J's reasoning. The exception was “the AGL logo ina
black cloud, held above its Loy Yang A power station in a manner that suggests
the cloud is emanating from the power station” which was in the judge’s view
“sufficiently parodic or satirical”.

The case law, although limited, is complex to reconcile. On the one hand
Pokémon Company International v Redbubble and Universal Music Publishing
» Palmer stand for the proposition that irrespective of whether the matter
presented is objectively parodic or satirical, the user’s actual purpose matters:
the former was too commercial (selling merchandise), the latter was too
political (persuading voters). However, also in both cases the defendants did
not have the plaintiffs or the plaintiffs’ works as their targets. Moreover, it is
not difficult to see both defendants’ uses as highly consumptive (above see:
10.3.5.3) using the Pikachu artwork and the song for their own aesthetic sake.
In contrast stands AGL Energy v Greenpeace Australia Pacific: a case where the

defendant is politically targeting the plaintiff directly through the medium
of the plaintiff's artistic work logo. The logo’s use was not for the sake of its
aesthetics but the company it represented. Burley J did not regard the clear
political purpose of the defendant as disqualifying. Rather, so long as its use
could be regarded by the court as parodic or satirical it was held to qualify
for the defence. However, it might be asked whether such a “toxic” political
campaign falls within the “ poking fun at” intent of this fair dealing purpose!
It might be useful in future borderline cases to consider the suggestion made
by the US Supreme Court in Campbell v Acuff-Rose Music that “the goals of
the copyright law ... are not always best served by automatically granting
injunctive relief when parodists are found to have gone beyond the bounds of
fair use” and that the copyright owner's interest may be adequately protected
by an award of damages in lieu As discussed in Chapter 14 (see: 14.6.1) this
is clearly an option under Australian law.

10.3.7 Reporting of news

As noted above, in the 1911 Act a fair dealing with a work for the purpose of
“newspaper summary” did not constitute an infringement of copyright In
1948 the Berne Convention, by its Brussels revision, gave recognition to such
excepted use as an international norm: “It shall be permissible ... to make short
quotations from newspaper articles and periodicals, as well as to include them
in press summaries.” In modern Australian law under the 1968 Act s 42(1)
(its Part IV counterpart s 103B(1) was added in 1986) has not substantively
changed over the decades, merely modernised to take account of the exercises
by communication to the public. A fair dealing with a work does not constitute
an infringement of the copyright in the work if it is for the purpose of “or is
associated with” either (a) “the reporting of news in a newspaper, magazine
or similar periodical and a sufficient acknowledgement of the work is made”*>
or (b) “the reporting of news by means of a communication or in a cinemato-
graph film”. In the 1990 case of De Garis v Neville Jeffress Pidler the facts of

which have been discussed (above see: 10.3.4) Beaumont J had no difficulty
in concluding that the mere taking of a newspaper article and wholly supply-
ing it in the course of a trading activity without comment can not amount to
the reporting of news.” However, in view of Pro Sieben Media v Carlton UK
Television, the modern cases reveal some potential for overlap between the
criticism or review and the reporting of news purposes. So that in Pro Sieben
itself discussed above (see: 10.3.5) the use of the footage by the defendant was
considered, by way of obiter, to fall with the UK defence of fair dealing for the
purpose of “reporting current events” °* The subject of the extract (a couple
expecting octuplets) was “on any view current events of real interests to the
public” and that “the volume and intensity of media interest was sufficient to
bring the media coverage itself within the ambit of current events” 2?

In TCN Channel Nine v Network Ten where as noted above (see: 10.3.5) the
principles applied in Pro Sieben were accepted by consensus, relatively detailed
examinations of the reporting of news fair dealing purpose occurred. One
examination was its application to footage, 10 seconds taken from a plaintiff
broadcast of over two hours, of the winner (a person of great physical stature)
of a sports award failing to notice an attempt by the then Prime Minister (a
person of lesser physical stature) to congratulate him. This failure was a latent
aspect of the footage, only noticed after the event by the defendant broadcaster
which twice re-broadcast the footage (the second time in slow-motion to high-
light the incident) accompanied by humorous commentary. Was this reporting
of news by the defendant? Overturning the trial judge, and with reasoning that
is inimical to investigative journalism, the Full Court unanimously thought it
was not:

Section 103B proceeds upon the basis that the news exists independently
of the Panel Segment [the broadcast of the defendant], and the defence is
attracted if the Panel Segment is broadcast for the purpose of or in associa-
tion with the reporting of that news. Yet here, if there is any news, it arises
by reason of the slowing down of the footage so as to display a hitherto
unnoticed incident which, had it been noticed, might have been a source of
embarrassment for the Prime Minister.”

A similarly restrictive approach was applied to the re-use of the footage earlier
discussed (above see: 10.3.5.3) involving the same Prime Minister serenading a
long-retired cricketer. Hely J, writing for the Full Court majority and uphold-
ing the trial judge held:
But a contention that “The Panel” was reporting an item of news, namely
that the Prime Minister had sung ‘Happy Birthday” to Sir Donald Bradman
on the “Midday Show” some 14 days earlier, and that the Panel Segment
was shown for the purpose of or in association with the reporting of that

news is, to my mind, an exaggeration or distortion of the facts. The Panel
Segment was simply shown for its entertainment value.

On this use, the dissent by Finkelstein J is unambiguous: “an incident where
the Prime Minister of a country has behaved in a way which some might call
‘silly’ is certainly newsworthy” 2
The defence has been given a less restrictive treatment in several other first
instance decisions. Hill J in Nine Network v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
accepted the potential availability of fair dealing for reporting of news as
weighing against the grant of an interlocutory injunction. This was notwith-
standing the dealing was to involve a humorous commentary associated witha
live television broadcast of the millennium Sydney fireworks: “the argument of
[the defendant] on this point is not a weak one”. Similarly in Thoroughvision
v Sky Channel Ryan J considered the defendant broadcaster’s “Retro Racing”
television program, an expert panel discussion program, which took the final
30 or so seconds from the plaintiff's broadcasts of horse races conducted on
the previous day. The use included freezing some of the broadcast imagery
so that the defendant's panel members could point “out to viewers which
horses should be watched” ™ Justice Ryan considered that weighing against
the grant of interlocutory injunctive relief was the potential availability of fair
dealing at trial:
‘News’ is not defined in the Act but it seems to me to comprehend accounts
of recent events of interest to the general public or, probably, a particular
section of the general public ... [T]he defence afforded by s 103B may be
available in respect of a communication of an excerpt from a television
broadcast of coverage of even a minor race ... That is because a recital or
reproduction of events occurring in such a race would probably be regarded
as ‘news’ or newsworthy by persons with a special interest in racing like
viewers of Racing Retro ...5°
The Telstra v Premier Media Group decision, also interlocutory and applying
s 103B, is another helpful case in offering guidance on the practical operation
on news reporting fair dealing. The question before Allsop J was whether
the defendant's supply of a sports highlights package to two mobile telecom-
munication companies for their communication to subscribers could qualify as
a fair dealing for reporting of news? The court reasoned that it could. Clearly
the package contained substantial parts of the audio-visual items, but Allsop J
accepted that the inclusion of two minutes (of an 80-minute football game) ina
sports news report communicated to the public for up to 48 hours after the game
had finished, could comprise fair dealing for the purpose of new reporting.”

Also, and critically, the court highlighted the expansive nature of the defence
insofar as it was expressed “for the purpose of or is associated with ... the
reporting of news” (emphasis added). This expansive statutory language
distinguishes the new reporting purpose from the research or study purpose.
The Court reasoned that the defendant's on-passing of the highlights package
to mobile telecommunication companies for provision to their subscribers
might comprise a fair dealing “associated with” the reporting of news by
those companies." The most recent decision on point was that in Fairfax Media
Publications v Reed International Books Australia where Bennett J at final trial
considered (by way of obiter) that the provision of summaries of the plaintiff's
newspaper articles by the defendant was done by it for the purpose of, or was
associated with, the reporting of news. Therefore if (contrary to the Court’s
earlier holding**) the article headlines reproduced by the defendant had
comprised substantial parts of the source articles, the defendant's conduct in
using those headlines was merely as source citations for its summaries and
therefore fair dealing for the purpose of reporting news.

10.3.8 Judicial proceedings and professional legal advice

From enactment the 1968 Act provided in ss 43 and 104 that copyright in any
subject matter “is not infringed by anything done for the purposes of a judicial
proceeding or of a report of a judicial proceeding”. While this is a broad and
quite unconditional exception (i.e. no requirement of fair dealing) the use in
issue must have some proximity to judicial proceedings. In Ogawa v Spender
the Full Court held that:
the expressions ‘for the purposes of a judicial proceeding’ in s 43(1) and ‘a
proceeding before a court ...’ in the definition of ‘judicial proceeding’, are
directed to persons, including litigants and practitioners, who use copyright
material in the course of proceedings in the Court”
So that in Environmental Group v Bowd where the defendant copied the
plaintiff's works so as to assist what was believed to be an Australian Federal
Police investigation, but in which there was no court case on foot or pending,
Steward J held that s 43 could not apply to the copying because the “possibility
of future criminal proceedings is, I find, too remote from the act of copying to
engage this exception”
Section 43 was augmented in 1980 by having added to it in s 43(2) a fair
dealing exception for works “if done for the purposes of giving professional
advice by a legal practitioner or patent attorney”. In 1998 the drafting was more

formalised and added trade mark attorneys. However, from their insertion
in 1980 the counterpart Part IV professional advice revisions in s 104(b) and
(c) were always different. Rather than fair dealing, the Part IV exception is
couched more unconditionally, akin to the judicial exception: “for the purposes
of anything done”. Also s 104(b) and (c) were directed to both the purposes
of seeking professional advice from legal practitioners or patent attorneys
and their giving it, whereas s 43(2) is directed only to giving advice. In 1980
the differential treatment between the two was not explained in the relevant
Explanatory Memorandum and the treatment was not adjusted in 1998 when
trade mark attorneys were added to both provisions.#

10.3.9 Access for a person with a disability

In 2006 a fall-back, generalised exception was added as a type of peace offering
to copyright user groups lobbying for an Australian fair use exception in view
of perceived copyright maximalism reforms that the US-Australia Free Trade
Agreement obliged. Section 200AB, summarised below (see: 10.8), requires
uses that satisfy the TRIPS three-step test (special case, no conflict with normal
exploitation and no unreasonable prejudice to legitimate copyright own inter-
ests) and fall outside all other existing exceptions and statutory licences. This
s 200AB safety-net exception remains in place today for libraries, archives and
educational institutions, although it requires an application of the three-step
test which is really directed to WIO members when those countries are craft-
ing intellectual property exceptions in national laws and not to (say) Australian
primary schools when teachers are considering whether to digitise learning
materials.

As first enacted in 2006, s 200AB also included a non-institutional purpose:
use by or for a person with a disability. In 2013 the ALRC recommended
(in lieu of broader fair use reform) a new fair dealing purpose of “access for
people with disability”. This was seen as a less controversial aspect of the
ALRC Report that could be enacted when at the same time the similar purpose
was removed from the more cumbersome s 200AB. In 2017 a fair dealing
exception for the purpose of access by persons with a disability was inserted
into a new Part IVA of the 1968 Act - a Part that straddles both Parts III and
IV and thus removes the need for fair dealing exception drafting in stereo.
Section 113E provides that a fair dealing with copyright material does not
infringe copyright in the material if the dealing is for the purpose of one or
more persons with a disability having access to copyright material, whether the

dealing is by any of those persons or by another person.” Under the provision
fairness must be assessed, amongst other things, guided by four factors:
(a) the purpose and character of the dealing;
(b) the nature of the copyright material;
(©) the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or value of, the
material;
(d) the substantiality of the part dealt with, taken in relation to the whole
material.*

Notably omitted from the listed matters for the research or study fair dealing
exception was “possibility of commercial obtainment”

10.3.10 Proposed fair dealing quotation purpose

In 2020, and after a 2013 recommendation by the ALRC for quotation to be
added as a fair dealing purpose,” the Commonwealth government proposed:
anew fair dealing exception for quoting copyright material, subject to:

* quotation occurring for non-commercial purposes, or if the use is of
immaterial commercial value to the product or service in which it is
used

* use only by cultural and educational institutions, governments and
other persons engaged in public interest or personal research, and

* the making of the quotation must be compatible with fair practice
having regard to standard fairness factors.

This is a curious proposal, and quite a modest one. It can be contrasted with the
claims that art 10(1) of the Berne Convention (“It shall be permissible to make
quotations from a work which has already been lawfully made available to the
public, provided that their making is compatible with fair practice, and their
extent does not exceed that justified by the purpose, including quotations from
newspaper articles and periodicals in the form of press summaries”) obliges
nothing less than “Global, Mandatory, Fair Use”? On its face, authors of popu-
lar fiction could not avail themselves of the fair dealing exception proposed by
the Commonwealth in 2020 to include quotations in their published novels.
In 2013 Adeney put forward a nuanced and cogent proposal for quota-
tion fair dealing for Australia. It defined quotation as having the “purpose of
supporting an intellectual commentary or artistic idea contained in the quoting
work or other subject matter” and that “the quotation must be distinguishable

as such within the quoting work or subject matter and must be subsidiary
to the quoting work or subject matter” However, any quotation exception
will need to navigate many issues, not least of which is the music industry's
established custom of licensing music sampling. Indeed if the UK Court of
Appeal Pro Sieben v Carlton UK Television decision were to apply with full force
to the existing criticism or review fair dealing purpose, it offers considerable
scope for quotation to prosecute a criticism of or to illustrate a review of “the
ideas to be found in a work and its social or moral implications”

Pro Sieben v Carlton UK Television notwithstanding, in 2014 the UK added
a quotation fair dealing purpose in these terms:

Copyright in a work is not infringed by the use of a quotation from the work
(whether for criticism or review or otherwise) provided that—
(a) the work has been made available to the public,
(b) the use of the quotation is fair dealing with the work,
(©) the extent of the quotation is no more than is required by the
specific purpose for which it is used, and
(d) the quotation is accompanied by a sufficient acknowledgement
(unless this would be impossible for reasons of practicality or
otherwise).

This provision, coupled with Adeney’s 2013 worthwhile suggestions, provide
useful counterpoints to the Commonwealth government's more institutionally-
focused 2020 proposal.

10.4 Artistic works: the miscellaneous exceptions in
Division 7 of Part Ill

As noted in Chapter 6 artistic works in s 31 of the 1968 Act do not receive
some of the exclusive rights conferred upon literary, dramatic and music
works; most notably rights of public performance (i.e. display) and adaptation.
This reflects a public policy concern about the inconvenience that could arise
if the copyright owners of works of visual art were given too broad or too
far-reaching exclusive rights. In addition to their fewer s 31 exclusive rights,
artistic works are also subject to several specific exceptions unique to artistic
works in Division 7 of Part III which are also intended to deal with incidental
and expressive uses of the works that might, if they were not excepted, give
rise to undue hold-ups and fetters by copyright owners.

Thus it is an exception to the copyright in sculptures and works of artistic
craftsmanship on permanent public display or in premises open to the public,
and to the copyright in buildings, for those works to be reproduced in (and

indeed published through) a drawing, painting, photograph or cinematograph
film, or to include the work in a television broadcast.

There is also an exception created for the inclusion of any artistic work
in a cinematograph film or television broadcast “if its inclusion in the film or
broadcast is only incidental to the principal matters represented in the film or
broadcast” 2” Some analysis of this provision was undertaken in a comparative
advertising case involving the plaintiff's artwork on a “Pizza Hut” container
in an actual television advertisement made by the defendant, Eagle Boys Dial-
A Pizza. Although an interlocutory decision, Wilcox J provided a thorough
judicial consideration of what is meant by “only incidental” in the exception.
Wilcox J agreed with the plaintiff that “the whole point of the advertisement
is to implant into the mind of the viewer a contrast between the advertiser,
which claims to be one hundred per cent Australian owned, and a competitor,
which is probably widely believed not to be one hundred per cent Australian
owned”, and on one view that rendered its use as anything but incidental.
However, the Court also agreed with the defendant's position that “although
the reference to Pizza Hut is deliberate, the inclusion of the art work is only
incidental, simply to get across the major point”: the ownership comparison."
On balance Wilcox J thought the plaintiff's view proved too much: it was “not
uncommon, for example, for the editor of a television program relating to a
particular company or product to use shots of a logo or advertising mate-
rial used in connection with that company or product; the purpose being to
provide recognisable graphic material against an oral presentation” “ As such,
and while not expressing any concluded view, the court was more inclined to
prefer the position that the use was indeed “only incidental” to the promotion
of the defendant as Australian-owned.*

‘An exception, which is one of three related exceptions that cover other
subject matter, exists in favour of the reproduction of an artistic work when
making a cinematograph film solely for the purpose of lawful inclusion
(whether by voluntary permission or under statutory exception) of that work
in a television broadcast. This exception is subject to certain obligations
regarding the destruction or archiving of the film. As explained in Chapter 9

(see: 9.3.4) nested within the exception is a compulsory licence that permits a
third party to broadcast that copy on condition that it has paid to the owners of
copyright an agreed amount or an undertaking to pay an amount determined
by the Copyright Tribunal.*

A further exception permits a visual artist to recreate part of his or her
earlier work (including by the re-use of a mould, cast, sketch, plan, model
or study) so long as there is no repeating or imitating the “main design”
of the earlier work.” This can be understood as a long-standing type of
protection against the use of copyright ownership to restrain the trade of an
artistic author - however its boundaries are obscure and await modern judicial
consideration.

Finally, an exception exists, with clear kinship to the Australian implied
licence cases earlier discussed (above see: 10.2) for the reconstruction of a build-
ing, including copyright in any architectural plans where the building had
been constructed with the licence of the owner of copyright in those plans.”

10.5 Artistic works: the copyright/design overlap regime
in Division 8 of Part III

The best way to protect the shape (i.e. three-dimensional) design of mass-
produced articles in the shadow of copyright law has been a challenge for
intellectual property law *” The relevant TRIPS-inscribed Berne article confers
discretion on nations to determine the extent of copyright protection for “works
of applied art and industrial designs and models” 2 In relation to industrial
designs TRIPS requires that “independently created industrial designs that
are new or original” are protected for at least 10 years.” Provided that this

minimum level of protection for designs is met, under TRIPS national law is
given a reasonably free hand to settle on the extent to which exceptions to
copyright should exist at points of overlap with shape design protection.

Rothnie has neatly summarised the policy underpinnings of modern
Australian law in this regard:

Ithas long been accepted ... that generally copyright should not be the vehi-
cle for protecting artistic works when they are applied as three-dimensional
designs, ie. when what has been depicted in a drawing or photograph is
made and sold as a product. So, for example, if one were to draw a sketch
of a garment or of the latest children’s action toy, one would have an
artistic work capable of copyright protection if original. If one intends to
commercialise the design depicted in the sketch by making and selling the
garment, or the action toy, however, the broad policy (subject to a number
of qualifications) is that protection - if any - should be obtained through
registration as a design. In these cases, copyright protection was considered
too long and the lack of a requirement for registration was considered to
cause too many difficulties in ascertaining the existence and ownership of
the copyright?

Inachieving this policy outcome the definition of a “corresponding design” is

central to the operation of the law of exceptions regime of Part III, Division 8

which applies only to artistic works. In short, any registration of a corre-

sponding design (s 75 exception) or any systematic manufacture of products
embodying a corresponding design (s 77 exception) results in a significant
reproduction right exception in respect of an artistic work to which the design
corresponds. That central definition provides:
corresponding design, in relation to an artistic work, means visual features
of shape or configuration which, when embodied in a product, result in a
reproduction of that work, whether or not the visual features constitute a
design that is capable of being registered under the Designs Act 2003."

The application of this definition will be illustrated in the section that follows.

An overview of the regime of the Designs Act 2003 (Cth) is provided in

Chapter 15 (see: 15.2).

10.5.1 “Corresponding design”

In Chapter 6 it was noted (see: 6.2.2) that s 21(3)(a) of the 1968 Act provides that
an artistic work is deemed to have been reproduced from a two-dimensional

form if a version of the work is produced in a three-dimensional form. In
Chapter 2 it was explained (see: 2.8) how copyright in something such as a
drawing can subsist as an artistic work “whether the work is of artistic quality
or not”. Therefore, if a detailed technical drawing (perhaps aided by CAD
software) is made by natural person A of the perspective and dimensional
shape of a product, such as a plastic classroom chair, it being intended for
mass-production authorised by A, that drawing is an artistic work and the
chairs made from it by A are (subject to substantial part test being satisfied”)
reproductions of that work. Assuming A does authorise mass production and
sale of such chairs, A’s mass-produced plastic chairs will almost certainly not
be works or any other copyright subject matter. Rather, the chairs’ status is
merely as authorised reproductions of A’s drawing. However if person B,
without the licence of A, then reverse-engineers one of A’s plastic chair so as to
make an identical copy of it, derivation (causal connection) from the drawing
artistic work is satisfied: B’s copies are derived from one of A’s authorised
chairs which is an authorised reproduction of A’s drawing, and thus B’s chair
is likewise derived from the same drawing by A, albeit through the medium
of A’s chair. If A sued B under the 1968 Act for Part III copyright infringement,
leaving aside the Division 8 of Part III overlap regime to be discussed below,
A would almost certainly succeed: B’s chair is an unauthorised reproduction
of A’s drawing which is an artistic work*

However, on the facts in the above paragraph A would not succeed under
the 1968 Act in bringing an infringement action based on any reproduction of
A's artistic work essentially because of the Division 8 of Part III overlap regime.
In current Australian law protection available for visual features of the shape
of mass-produced products are generally conditioned upon design registration
under the Designs Act 2003 and confined to 10 years of design protection.”
Unless the rights holder can overcome the hurdle of establishing under the
1968 Act that the shape of its mass-produced product is derived from quite a
limited sub-set of artistic work types (a non-portable building, a model thereof
or, more significantly, a work of artistic craftsmanship) then in the absence
of registered design protection the shape is almost always free to copy.

The definitions of ss 5 and 7(1) of the Designs Act 2003 that are used in the
1968 Act’s Division 8 of Part III overlap regime" define a design to mean the
visual features of a product that include “shape, configuration, pattern and
ornamentation”. Critical to the overlap exception is a binary distinction. The
first two in the list, shape and configuration, are intended to refer to three-
dimensional visual features: e.g. a round-bellied teapot with a curly spout.
The latter two in the list, pattern and ornamentation, are intended to refer to
two-dimensional visual features: e.g. a decorative flat image of a sunflower
transferred onto the belly of that teapot. Assume that prior to any first making
a product designer, employed by the manufacturer, used some CAD technol-
ogy to technically draw the teapot with both the curly spout and the sunflower
image rendered in the drawing. A “corresponding design” under its s 74(1)
definition in the 1968 Act means in relation to that artistic work (ie. the CAD
drawing) the visual features of “shape or configuration” that, when embodied
in a product results in a reproduction of that work (i.e. applying ss 14(1) and
21(3)(a)), regardless of whether the visual features constitute a registrable
design. With the teapot example, the intent of the corresponding design defini-
tion is to capture only the shape of the teapot and not the sunflower image
which is merely a feature of “pattern or ornamentation”. This means in practice
that upon due registration of the overall design of the teapot, or absent design
registration, upon any authorised mass production of the teapot, the defences
ins 75 (registration of a corresponding design) and s 77 (industrial application
of an unregistered corresponding design) respectively apply to the reproduc-
tion right in the drawing so that any rival third-party trader can reproduce the
shape of the teapot without infringing copyright in the drawing. In relation to
the sunflower aspect, however, the policy of the law is to leave any copyright
in that image untouched by Division 8 of Part III regardless of any design
registration of it as an aspect of the visual feature of the teapot, or any mass
production of the teapots featuring the image. For such “flat” copyright and
design, dual protection is fully countenanced.** In other words, Division 8 of
Part III concerns itself with the shape of products and not essentially “flat”
visual art that decorates products. The latter do not definitionally fall within
the meaning of a corresponding design so that none of the Division's defences
will apply where such visual features are in issue, and the reproduction of
copyright law remains available. However, for the features of shape of the
teapot to receive Australian intellectual property protection, registration under
the Designs Act 2003 is typically required. In the given example, it is possible
that a statement of newness and distinctiveness (SOND) might be made by the
applicant for design registration so as to draw attention to the curly spout.

10.5.2 Functional shape theory and its rejection

However, where an artistic work is a corresponding design that falls within
s 77, courts have sometimes been troubled by the commercial amorality and
free-riding they perceive that the defence countenances. To use the teapot
example above, a rights holder in the clutches of s 77 (industrial application
of an unregistered corresponding design), and if a valid design registration
is foreclosed (see: 10.5.7), it will not be able to prevent any third-party trader
from “ripping off” the shape of the teapot. Frankly, the courts attempted to
circumvent the policy of s 77 to deter what was perceived as sharp commercial
conduct. As will be explained below when discussing the s 77(1A) defence
(below see: 10.5.6), one means of so doing was an expansive application of
so-called “plan-to-plan” liability. However, the primary means to effect this
circumvention was by finding that the thing one might have thought was an
industrially applied three-dimensional design, was not a design at all. Courts
held that if features of shape were dictated by purely functional considerations,
this rendered that shape not a design." This finding did not mean, however,
that an underlying technical drawing of those very features of shape was not
an original artistic work.’ By the defendant replicating the wholly functional
shape of the plaintiff's product in the defendant’s own competing product,
the defendant had reproduced the plaintiff's underlying technical drawing.
Copyright liability was made possible by this “functional shape theory”
circumventing the policy-based exception of s 77.

Asa matter of seeking corrective justice between an innovative plaintiff and
a copycat defendant this solution is perfectly understandable as private law. As
amatter of the intellectual property policy choice as public law, however, the line
of cases created a headache: certain product shapes considered so functional that
they were incapable of receiving a limited term of registered design protection,
were instead permitted to receive the far longer unregistered copyright term.
While the Australian Parliament intervened repeatedly, commencing in 1981
to attempt to overcome this line of authority by legislative amendments, the
judicial approach remained entrenched until a unanimous 2008 Full Court deci-
sion in Digga Australia v Norm Engineering gave effect to Parliament's intent.
As such, the functional shape theory has been consigned to legal history.

10.5.3 The grey zone between flat and shape design

An ongoing question that the definition of “corresponding design” begs is
the grey zone between visual features of shape and configuration (three-
dimensional) as opposed to pattern and ornamentation (two-dimensional),
including where such things as embroidery or engraving sits. The s 74(1)
definition of “corresponding design” speaks of visual features of shape or
configuration that are “embodied in” a product, and the term “embodied in”
is in turn defined in s 74(2) to include “woven into, impressed on or worked
into the product”. The relevant Explanatory Memorandum made plain that
this applied to articles such as texture designs, bas-relief, embroidery, weaves
and knits where a design would not be strictly applied to the article’s surface,
but instead would form part of the article The definition of a corresponding
design is intended to embrace such designs, treating them as visual features
of shape or configuration. Notwithstanding this, the Full Court in Polo/Lauren
v Ziliani Holdings considered (by way of obiter) that the famous Polo Lauren
embroidered logo of a mounted polo player in action, which noticeably
protruded from the fabric of the garment, was not a corresponding design.
This was because, on the Full Court's reasoning, the garment upon which it
was applied was not made in the shape or configuration of the polo player
underlying artistic work, quite irrespective of whether or not the embroidered
logo itself was three-dimensional.™ The Full Court’s view here was appar-
ently anchored by its earlier holding that the logo was an “accessory to an
article” (being a “label affixed, displayed on, incorporated in the surface of
... the article”™) for the purpose of enlivening the s 44C parallel importa-
tion defence.” Regardless, it is a tendentious holding and one that appears
inconsistent with the clear statutory policy of s 74(2).% As Luck has argued, the
Full Court’s decision confines the loss of copyright protection under Division 8
of Part III more than the language of the relevant provision requires, and goes
on to observe that Polo/Lauren may create potential difficulties to the extent it

becomes unclear how a product acquired its shape and configuration.™ Thus
in Seafolly v Fewstone Dodds-Streeton J, after lengthy and detailed reasoning
in the shadow of Polo/Lauren, arrived at the conclusion that a diamond pattern
embroidered upon a garment was not a corresponding design.’ The conclu-
sions in Polo/Lauren and Seafolly might necessitate a clarifying amendment to
s 74(2) which signal their acceptance or rejection by the legislature.

10.5.4 Sections 75-76 defence regime: registration of a
corresponding design

The first exception in Division 8 of Part II is that created in ss 75 and 76. These
provide that when a corresponding design is registered under the Designs Act
2003 (or its predecessor 1906 Act), and that has occurred by a person duly
entitled to be entered on the register (which by s 76 applies when registration
occurs with the permission of the copyright owner in any underlying artistic
work) then it is not an infringement of copyright (by the effect of s 75) to
reproduce any artistic work (including such things as works of artistic crafts-
manship) by embodying the corresponding design in a product. The defence
relies on (as does the entire Division) a “corresponding design” (above see:
10.5.1) so that copyright protection is not lost upon the registration of a flat
design - such as the sunflower in the above teapot illustration - and dual
copyright and design protection may exist in such cases.

10.5.5 Section 77 defence: industrial application of a
corresponding design

Next s 77 mainly deals with unregistered or unregistrable corresponding
designs that have been commercialised in volume. For such designs it provides
ins 77(1),(2) that:

* once such a corresponding design has been industrially applied to a
product - deemed to occur once it has been applied to more than 50
articles - whether in Australia or elsewhere, with the authority of the
copyright owner; and

* that product has been sold, let for hire or offered/exposed for sale or
hire - again, whether in Australia or elsewhere ~ then;

* the related copyright, except in a non-portable building, a model
thereof, or a work of artistic craftsmanship, cannot be infringed by
applying that design to a product

The provision also creates adjunct exceptions for when products made toa corre-
sponding design are disclosed in patent specifications or design applications.*”
Aside from the carve out in s 77(1) for non-portable buildings, models thereof

or works of artistic craftsmanship, the section as a whole does not apply to
products upon which are applied corresponding designs that are precluded
from being the subject of design registration under the Designs Act 2003. This
is quite a limited group, including designs for paper currency, integrated
circuits within the meaning of the Circuit Layouts Act 1989 (Cth), designs that
are scandalous, and designs for flags or State emblems.**

Important to understanding the logic of the s 77(1),(2) exception (industrial
application of a corresponding design) is the role played by the work of artistic
craftsmanship as a kind of plank in the wreckage when a plaintiff's copyright
infringement action can be defended by pleading the exception. Generally
speaking a plaintiff who is faced with this defence can only meet it by estab-
lishing that they have more than just a technical drawing that underpins the
corresponding design: it must establish that there is (most typically) a work of
artistic craftsmanship that underpins the corresponding design. To return to
the earlier introductory example of A and B and the plastic classroom chairs:
assuming B pleaded the s 77(1),(2) defence, A could only succeed if A could
establish that aside from the technical drawing A also made with special
skill some artefact (i.e. a prototype chair) that qualified as a work of artistic
craftsmanship.” In the leading case on what is a work of artistic craftsman-
ship - Burge v Swarbrick - A’s position is equivalent to the position that the
plaintiff Mr John Swarbrick was in when trying to establish that the plug for
the hull of the racing yacht was a work of artistic craftsmanship.” A’s position
is also the same as State of Escape Accessories when trying to establish that the
prototype perforated neoprene tote bag first made by Ms Brigitte MacGowan
was a work of artistic craftsmanship. In both cases (the holdings by the High
Court in Burge v Swarbrick and by the trial judge in State of Escape Accessories v
Schwartz) neither artefact qualified as a work of artistic craftsmanship because
the form of each was too dictated by functional constraints. The consequence of
the holdings was the same in each case: the defendants had a complete defence
under s 77(1),(2) in respect of the reproduction right in any other underlying
artistic work such as a blueprint or other drawing. As far as the 1968 Act goes,
the policy is the defendants in such cases are free to copy and compete. Because
neither Swarbrick nor State of Escape Accessories had secured registered
design protection, and by the time of the litigation that avenue was closed
off because their designs were well and truly in the prior art base, they had
no right to prevent reproduction in copyright law and no right to registered
design protection.

What will amount to “industrial application”? This is the critical trigger
for enlivening s 77. Section 77(4) confers power for the regulations to specify
a quantity that will be taken as industrial application, and the regulations
specify “more than 50 articles”.*” But this is merely a deeming provision: it
is not a minimum. Thus in Burge v Swarbrick where there had been 32 hulls
manufactured and sold the design of which corresponded to any artistic work
of the plaintiff, it was conceded by the plaintiff that number amounted to an
industrial application.2® In Gold Peg v Kovan, Crennan J gave quite detailed
consideration to the question of what amounts to industrial application and
distilled that the legal standard required systematic manufacture. CrennanJ
concluded that the manufacture of 26 of the bottom elbow components of
the plaintiff's cooking machine had involved systematic manufacture (and
therefore industrial application of the corresponding design) but the five
manufactures of the machine's rotor had not amounted to an industrial appli-
cation. On the rotor the Court held that:

[T]he final construction of the rotor as depicted in the drawings was a pains-
taking and skilful task. This was not an industrial manufacturing process
involving system and repetition. Having regard to the complex nature of
the rotors and their manner of manufacture as described in the evidence
I am not satisfied, on the civil standard of proof, that the production of
the rotors in question, involved systematic manufacture and therefore I
find their production falls outside the statutory concept of an industrial
application of a corresponding design.”

While this clearly involves fact-specific settings and fine questions of judg-
ment, Crennan J's decision in Gold Peg provides guidance where the question
of industrial application is at the borderline.

10.5.6 Section 77A defence

Circumvention of the s 77 defence by functional shape theory has been
discussed (above see: 10.5.2). But as also noted this was not the only circum-
vention technique employed by the courts. Courts used another means, first
labelled by Wilcox J in 1986 as “plan-to-plan” copying. This was liability in
the defendant for the infringements consisting not of final three-dimensional
products infringing the plaintiff's technical drawings, but rather that the blue-
prints used by the defendant to make those products infringed the plaintiff's
drawings; hence the so-called “plan-to-plan” theory of liability. Similar to func-
tional shape theory, plan-to-plan theory has also sparked legislative reform

in 2003 to curtail this circumvention of the copyright exception.”” However,
unlike functional shape theory, the legislature’s reforms have purposefully
left an aspect of the plan-to-plan theory of liability intact. The plan-to-plan
settings that had emerged in Australia can be loosely split into two types of
case: industrial espionage and reverse-engineering.

The first type of case - industrial espionage - involved the plaintiff's techni-
cal drawings being directly copied for the defendant to manufacture products
based on those drawings. This setting arose in an interlocutory hearing in 1986
and again in a 1992 case which proceeded to final trial."* Both were heard by
Wilcox J and both involved copyright works associated with the company
Warman International. It was in these cases that the expression “plan-to-plan”
copying was coined, and substantial damages - $1 million - were awarded in
the 1992 case for such copying.

The other type of case - reverse-engineering - was when two-dimensional
indirect infringement of a plaintiff's technical drawings arose as an incident
to reverse-engineering the plaintiff's product by the defendant. In this setting
a plaintiff owns the artistic work copyright in technical drawings upon which
the shape of its product is based. A defendant reverse-engineers the plaintiff's
product, and in so doing prepares its own set of technical drawings in order
to effect manufacture. The defendant's drawings are said to infringe the plain-
tiff’s drawings, even though the defendant at no point had direct access to
the plaintiff's drawings. Thus, these reverse-engineering cases are really more
aptly described as “ plan-to-product-to-plan” copying.”

Plan-to-plan theory in Australia was sparked by the presumption that
the s 77 exception in the paradigm case merely rendered non-infringing the
shape-based incorporation of the plaintiff's artistic work into the defend-
ant’s three-dimensional manufactured articles. Because only these articles of
manufacture made by the defendant were covered by the exception, under
the plan-to-plan theory of liability any one-off derivative two-dimensional
reproduction of the plaintiff's artistic work made by the defendant fell outside
the exception.” This was even so in the reverse-engineering cases when such
infringing reproductions were derived indirectly and merely as an incident
to making non-infringing end manufactured articles. In these latter and
somewhat problematic cases the outcome was that drawing a blueprint of the
widget infringes copyright yet making the widget did not.

When reform was undertaken to address the question of liability under
plan-to-plan theory in the form of the current s 77A of the 1968 Act, the
substance of recommendations from a 1995 ALRC report were adopted.

Section 77A(1) provides that reproductions or communications of artistic
works are not infringing if they are made in the course of, or incidental to,
making or commercialising products that themselves are non-infringing
because of the operation of either s 75 or s 77. As expressed in the 2002
Explanatory Memorandum:

[A] drawing or plan made in the course of manufacturing non-infringing
three-dimensional products may infringe copyright in the original draw-
ing or plan. Unless such indirect copying in the course of manufacture is
permissible, the legislative purpose of avoiding dual copyright and design
protection for three-dimensional products may be frustrated. A similar
problem may also arise in advertising a non-infringing product if a sketch or
photograph of it used in an advertisement or catalogue infringes copyright
in the original artistic work. This amendment should not affect the copyright

22

protection of an original artistic work against direct copying.”

It is instructive to examine s 77A(1) through the prism of this passage from the
Explanatory Memorandum. The first three sentences are dealing with reverse-
engineering settings - ie. “indirect copying in the course of manufacture”
~ in which case both the production drawings and marketing illustration are
intended to receive copyright exceptions. Thus s 77A(1) is conditioned upon
the exception applying only in cases where “the reproduction is derived from
a three-dimensional product that embodies a corresponding design in relation
to the artistic work” The 2002 Explanatory Memorandum also makes plain
that the s77A (1) reform extends the exception not merely to technical drawings
made in the course of reverse-engineering non-infringing products, but also
to marketing imagery later produced, such as a defendant's marketing photo-
graphs of its finished product. Furthermore s 77A(2) provides that casts or
moulds do not infringe artistic work copyright if they are made for the purpose
of making products that themselves are non-infringing because of the operation
of either s 75 or s 77. The fourth and final sentence of the passage from the
2002 Explanatory Memorandum quoted above reveals that, consistent with the
ALRC report, the reform’s policy intent was to maintain plan-to-plan liability in
cases of industrial espionage - ie. “direct copying”. Thus direct derivation from

the plaintiff's technical drawings - as occurred in the Warman International
cases - will disqualify the defendant from the s 77A(1) exception.”

10.5.7 Operative logic in the area of overlap

It should be noted here that a reciprocal copyright/design overlap regime
inhabits the Designs Act 2003. Section 18 of that Act is discussed further in
Chapter 15 (see: 15.2). It provides that if copyright subsists in an artistic work,
and an application is made with the consent of the copyright owner for regis-
tration of a corresponding design, then the design is not to be treated as being
other than new and distinctive (being the criteria for registration under the
Designs Act 2003) by reason only of any use previously made of the artistic
work, unless that use consisted of the sale or hire of products to which the
design had been applied industrially (within the meaning of s 77 of the 1968
Act) with the consent of the copyright owner. The intent of the provision,
which removes those uses from the prior art base can be illustrated. A design-
ing artist draws a cartoon dog character - say “Scraps: the intrepid terrier”
~ and Scraps appears with the artist’s consent as an animated cartoon character
on screen via a YouTube channel and by a printed newspaper cartoon strip.
Such exploitations of the Scraps artistic work would not comprise industrial
application of a corresponding design. If the designing artist thereafter sought
design registration for a Scraps stuffed toy based on the visual features of the
artistic work these prior exploitations would be disregarded as prior art by
the operation of s 18 and thus not destroy the newness or the distinctiveness
of the design.” The defence in s 77 of the 1968 Act and facilitating role of s 18
of the Designs Act 2003 work together to highlight the point about legal policy
made by Rothnie in 2005, and which remains equally valid today: protection
for the “look” of the Scraps stuffed toy - if any - should most obviously be
obtained through registration as a design.** Thus, had the Scraps stuffed toy
been mass-produced (i.e. involving systematic manufacture) with the design-
ing artist’s consent prior to the application for a design, then it would have
been outside s 18 of the Designs Act 2003 (because it is a relevant industrial
application of a corresponding design) and, subject to the new grace period
regime, formed part of the relevant prior art base. As summarised in Chapter
15 (see: 15.2) the grace period which commences operation in s 17 of the Designs
Act 2003 on 10 March 2022, removes from the prior art base all publications
and uses from the designing artist in the 12 months before the filing date of
the design application. While s 18 will continue to apply to exclude from the
prior art base any earlier “flat” exploitations of the artistic work, the new grace

period is intended to lessen the harshness of the current law where industrial
application occurs in ignorance of its legal consequences. However, outside
of the grace period, entry of the design embodied in the form of the Scraps toy
into the prior art base precludes a valid design registration for the appearance
of the toy. Such manufacture would also enliven the s 77 defence in the 1968
Act so as to preclude enforcement of the three-dimensional reproduction right
in the underlying artistic work. In this circumstance if the designing artist
wished to take action against a copycat Scraps stuffed toy made by a third
party, in the absence of a “prototype” stuffed toy that comprises a work of
artistic craftsmanship recourse would need to be made to rights other than
those in either design law or copyright law — such as passing off and s 18
of the Australian Consumer Law or the possibility of registered trade mark
protection for the shape of Scraps.

Conversely, the policy of the law facilitates dual design and copyright
protection for flat visual features of design. So that, instead of the stuffed toy,
if the designing artist seeks registered design protection for a standard t-shirt
ornamented with a flat printed image of Scraps, and the priority date of that
design application pre-dates any public use authorised by the designing artist
of the ornamented t-shirt in Australia, the design registration would be likely
valid and the registration would be clearly outside the s 75 defence of the
1968 Act.” This is because the ornamentation of the t-shirt with the printed
image is not a corresponding design. As such the designing artist could both
obtain design registration for the visual features of ornamentation of the Scraps
design on the t-shirt product and maintain reproduction rights in copyright
against a copycat Scraps t-shirt maker.2*

The three-dimensional versus two-dimensional divide can create in many
cases a type of “all or nothing” dichotomy - save and except for a decision
such as Polo/Lauren which arguably offends statutory purpose by creating an
unnecessarily wide grey zone between the two.

10.6 | Computer programs: Division 4A of Part III

10.6.1 Overview

The first introduction in 1984 of a definition of “computer program” as a
literary work brought with it, then in s 43A, an exception from liability for
the making of back-up copies for the benefit of the owner of an authorised
copy. In 1999 after the CLRC Computer Software Protection Report, this sole

exception was subsumed by five purpose-based exceptions taking the form of
Division 4A of Part IIL? However shortly after the Division was added, the
High Court in Data Access v Powerflex discussed in Chapter 2 (see: 2.2) held
that the so-called Huffman compression table produced within the plaintiffs
program was itself a work separate from the program, being a table that was
an original literary work.” This holding triggered the addition in 2001 of a
revised definition of the meaning of a computer program that was specific to
both Division 4A of Part III and, from 2005, the various technological protection
measure definitions of Division 2A of Part V discussed in Chapter 7 (see: 7.6)
so as to provide that:

computer program includes any literary work that is:

(a) incorporated in, or associated with, a computer program; and

(b) essential to the effective operation of a function of that computer

program.”°

This more expansive definition merely expands the scope of the exceptions in
Division 4A (and protection of technological protection measures in Division
2A of Part V) rather than alters the subject matter nature of a computer program
as a literary work.

There are two other features of Division 4A that are of significance in
its framing. The first is s 47G which prescribes for all its five purpose-based
exceptions that if a reproduction or adaptation made under them is used or
dealt with for an extraneous purpose the exception “does not apply, and is
taken never to have applied”.

The second is s 47H which is quite unique in the 1968 Act insofar as it
nullifies any contractual obligation that purports to exclude or limit any of the
five exceptions for Division 4A - aside from an aspect of the first.” In 2002
a collateral significance of s 47H was identified by the CLRC: the omission
of counterpart provisions elsewhere in the 1968 Act suggested that all other
exceptions in the Act (including fair dealing) were amenable to contractual
exclusion.”*

10.6.2 Incidental reproduction: section 47B

The first exception in Division 4A provides that the copyright in a computer
program is not infringed by a person who has lawful use of an authorised
copy of the program, and who reproduces the program “incidentally and
automatically as part of the technical process of running” the copy, where
this is done either for the purposes for which the program was designed; or,

for the purposes of studying the program.*” While the former purpose might
also receive the benefit of an implied licence as discussed above (see: 10.2) and
while the latter purpose might also receive the benefit of research or study
fair dealing (see: 10.3.4), the provision provides a clear exception for both.
The provision also occupies a large area of overlap with s 43B, itself added
in 2004 as part of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement reforms discussed
in Chapter 6 (see: 6.2.4) which provides an exception for making a temporary
reproduction of a work if it is made incidentally as a necessary part of using
an authorised copy of the work.

10.6.3 Back-up copy and data security: section 47C

The next exception facilitates the making of a back-up copy of a computer
program and, with its drafing informed by the 1995 CLRC Report is an
expanded version of the initial 1984 exception.” It provides that copyright
in a computer program is not infringed if a reproduction is made (other than
by a process of decompilation™) by or on behalf of an owner or licensee of
an authorised copy of the program if done to make a back-up copy of the
program to use if the authorised copy is lost, destroyed or rendered inutile; or,
as part of the normal back-up copying of data for security purposes.”* While
the exception permits in some circumstances a back-up from the back-up, it
never applies “if the owner of the copyright in the computer program has so
designed the program that copies of it cannot be made without modifying the
program”. There has been limited judicial consideration of this provision
although in Racing and Wagering Western Australia v Software Ag the trial judge
had no hesitation in concluding by way of obiter that a mirrored copy of a
computer program, made as part of disaster contingency planning, and stored
on an off-site disaster recovery mainframe, plainly satisfied both purposes of
back-up copying and data security

10.6.4 Interoperability: section 47D

The third exception to facilitate interoperability is of particular commercial
significance insofar as it permits software competitors to reproduce a rival’s
program code to produce programs such as plug-ins and applications that
work with the rival’s computer program This can be seen in the Google 0
Oracle America US litigation which culminated in a 2021 US Supreme Court
decision that found (by majority) that Google's use of Oracle’s Java code in
Google’s Android mobile phone operating system was not copyright infringe-
ment because it constituted fair use in aid of interoperability:
Here Google's use ... seeks to create new products. It seeks to expand
the use and usefulness of Android-based smartphones. Its new product
offers programmers a highly creative and innovative tool for a smartphone
environment.

The Australian exception pre-dates this decision by more than two decades
and provides a useful contrast between Australia’s more codified approach
to exceptions as opposed to the fair use approach which relies so heavily on
private litigation. The Australian exception in s 47D creates an exception so
that a reproduction or an adaptation can be made of an authorised copy of an
“original program”, being a reproduction or an adaptation made by, or for and
on behalf of, the owner or licensee of a copy of that program, if done “only to
the extent necessary” to obtain information on how to achieve interoperability
and to make an interoperable new program. The provision’s own terms eluci-
dates what it regards as “interoperate” by the expression “to connect to and
be used together with, or otherwise to interoperate with, the original program
or any other program”.

Section 47D is quite broad on its face. However in the only detailed judicial
consideration given to it, the exception was held not to apply to a defendant
who developed and supplied a program (2BDB2) which was designed to
facilitate data migration from one database system (Datacom) of the plaintiff
toa rival database system (DB2) developed by IBM.” In order to effect migra-
tion, the defendant’s 2BDB2 program in earlier variants dated 2004 and 2009
had used replacement macros (a command that triggers a sequence of other
functions to be executed) that were found to reproduce a number of macros
within the plaintiff's Datacom system, macros the trial judge held were each
its own literary work computer program. Could the defendant avail itself of
the interoperability defence? Bennett J rejected the availability of the defence,
finding the reproductions were not undertaken “for or on behalf” of relevant
licensees:

The 2004 and 2009 macros were created by [the defendant] for the purposes
of updating 2BDB2 for its own commercial purposes, for distribution ...
The effect of [the defendant’s] submission is that any product used by

a customer would have been made on behalf of that customer for the
purposes of s 47D(1)(a). Section 47D(1)(a) does not contemplate a defence
to infringement of copyright in a computer program in circumstances
where an independent third party reproduces a computer program and
then for commercial purposes provides that reproduction to a licensee of the
computer program. This is the case even if the third party has an ongoing
commercial relationship with the licensee of the computer program. I reject
[the defendant's] submission.=*

This has an echo of the approach taken to research or study fair dealing (above
see: 10.3.4). Under the holding the party who pleads the defence must be seek-
ing to avail itself of the defence’s purpose or if for a third party, for and on
behalf of a highly customised once-off installation. Making and supplying an
off-the-shelf product to customers at large appears to be outside the scope of
the defence. Writing in 2012, in the immediate wake of the decision, commen-
tors noted that:

Parties seeking to rely on the interoperability defence under section 47D
of the Act will need to show that they were acting in response to ‘specific
requests’ from customers. This suggests that the interoperability defence
under section 47D will only apply to bespoke software work for particular
customers (or by firms on their own behalf) and not any broader right to
create software packages to facilitate interoperability”

On the core question of whether the reproductions qualified as meeting the
interoperability purpose, Bennett J appeared to be hamstrung by the nature
of the submissions in the case, and offered on that question the following
somewhat speculative obiter:

However, the relevant reproduction or adaptation was not of Datacom but
of the [plaintiff's] macros, which are the original program. Datacom and
DB2 are therefore in the category of ‘any other program’.

As [the defendant's] replacement macros are designed to make 2BDB2
operate in an entirely Datacom free environment by replacing the [plaintiff's]
macros, 2BDB2 does not reproduce the [plaintiff's] macros ‘to connect to and
be used together with, or otherwise to interoperate with’ the [plaintiff’s]
macros (the original program). Indeed, 2BDB2 replaces the [plaintiff's]
macros. However, it could be said that [the defendant] reproduced or
adapted the [plaintiff’s] macros to make independently 2BDB2 to be used
together with or to interoperate with Datacom or DB2 (any other program).
However, again, [the defendant] did not explain precisely how it contends
the subsection operates and, accordingly, [the plaintiff] did not respond”

On both points this all reveals a caution and conservatism in the approach
to the Australian exception, and arguably a far cry from the breadth of the
Google v Oracle America 2021 fair use holding in the US. The s 47D exception
awaits further judicial consideration or legislative reform in view of the 2021
US Supreme Court decision.

10.6.5 Error correcting: section 47E

An exception exists so that a reproduction or an adaptation can be made (after
23 February 1999) of an authorised copy of an “original program”, being a
reproduction or an adaptation made by, or for and on behalf of, the owner or
licensee of a copy of that program, if made “only to the extent reasonably neces-
sary” to correct an error in that program, and subject to the non-availability of
an error-free program within a reasonable time and an ordinary commercial
price." Sundberg J noted in 2008 how this exception gives clear and direct
effect to a CLRC recommendation and that it was described in the relevant
Second Reading Speech as allowing “the use of the decompilation process for
the corrections of errors in a program where an error-free copy of the program

is not reasonably available at a commercial price”

10.6.6 Security testing: section 47F

A fifth and final exception did not originate from a CLRC Report recommenda-
tion. It permits a reproduction or an adaptation to be made from an authorised
copy of an “original program”, being a reproduction or an adaptation made
by, or for and on behalf of, the owner or licensee of a copy of that program, if
made “only to the extent reasonably necessary” for good faith security testing
of the original copy or the system of which it is a part, and subject to the
resulting information being not readily available from another source.** It is
clear enough that “security testing” here is using the word security ina manner
quite distinct from its use in s 43C which is “normal back-up copying of data for
security purposes”. In contrast s 47F is dealing with the testing of a computer
program’s “vulnerability to unauthorised access” through means such as hack-
ing or malicious code. Section 43C is concerned with catastrophic data loss
caused by “fire, earthquake or even terrorist attack” .* The trial judge in Racing
and Wagering Western Australia v Software AG conflated the two in error so as to
give s 47F an unduly broad scope, a mistake corrected on appeal where the Full
Court unanimously interpreted the exception as limited to testing “to ascertain
its security from unauthorised access or against electronic or other invasion”

10.7 ‘Private use

As originally enacted in 1968 the Act contained a narrow and shallow excep-
tion for private use: in s 111 there was a Part IV broadcast copyright exception,
and not covering the content included in a broadcast, for copying a broadcast
for the private and domestic use of the person who made the copy.” In the
wake of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement reforms came the realisation
that in the 1984 Sony v Universal decision the US Supreme Court had long ago
created a far broader exception for private use within the rubric of fair use.
This served as a trigger for 2006 private use Australian exceptions.** These
essentially were intended to map to the then scope of US fair use jurisprudence
as it pertained to private use, dealing with two broad notions: “time-shifting”
of broadcast content and “format-shifting” of content stored on pre-recorded
media.

For time-shifting the vehicle was the reform of s 111. This became an
exception for making a single copy of a broadcast by a person solely for the
private use of watching or listening “at a time more convenient than when
the broadcast is made” .° Unlike the old s 111, the exception extended to both
sound and television broadcasts, and all copyright subject matter included in
such broadcasts.” The provision also makes clear that the exception is deemed
“never to have applied” if that copy is then commercially dealt with.> The
provision was considered by the Full Court in 2012.** The defendant, a major
internet and telecommunications company, had a centralised, cloud-based
service enabling a subscriber to record broadcast content and then elect for
it to be later played back to that subscriber by streaming technologies. The
Full Court, overturning a single instance decision, found that the defendant
failed to qualify under the new s 111 because it was (if not the sole maker)
at least a co-maker of the copy and there was “nothing in the language, or
the provenance, of s 111 to suggest that it was intended to cover commercial
copying on behalf of individuals” .**

The other exceptions introduced in 2006 permitted the owner of certain
authorised (non-infringing) reproductions or copies to make a further repro-
duction or copy (the so-called “main copy”) in a different format for private
and domestic use. Similar to the revised s 111 these four exceptions apply
to all implicated subject matter — so that the exception for sound recordings
includes “a literary, dramatic or musical work or other subject matter included
in the sound recording” .*° The exceptions also all provide that only one “main
copy” can be made ina particular format and the use of the main copy is only

for private and domestic purposes. Similar to s 111 the provisions operate so
that they are deemed to have “never applied” if the main copy is commer-
cially dealt with.» The provisions neither exclude media that is the subject of
technological protection measures nor are there circumvention exceptions that
might facilitate such copying.~” In terms of scope of permissible format shifts
for the main copy, the basic thrust of these exceptions can be summarised as
follows:

* books, newspapers and periodical publications may be format shifted
into a different form — e.g. a hard-copy book may be format-shifted to
a PDF file form;**

* photographs may be format shifted from electronic format to a hard-
copy format, or froma hard copy to electronic format - e.g. a digital file
image can be printed out or a hard-copy photograph may be format-
shifted to a JPG file form;**

* sound recordings in any format (including CDs, tapes, vinyl records
and digital downloads but not podcasts which are referred to as “a
digital recording of a radio broadcast or similar program”) may be
copied into any format that can be used on a device that is owned
by the person making the copy - which is the most liberal of the four
exceptions in terms of scope;

* cinematograph films in analogue video tape format to electronic
format - which is the most limited of the four exceptions in terms of
scope.

With the emergence in the 21st century of digital subscription, streaming and
cloud-based services many of these 2006 private use exceptions appear dated -
perhaps the view of the defendant in the case discussed above, National Rugby
League v Singtel Optus.*® The ALRC suggested in 2013 that “non-commercial
private use” should be a fair dealing purpose. Doing so would avoid
technologically-rigid drafting, but perhaps not provide the same comfort that
often comes from the predictive certainty of specific rules.

10.8 Summary of other (more targeted) exceptions

Section 28

Sections 39A, 104B

Sections 39B, 112E
Sections 43A, 111A

Sections 43B, 111B

Section 44

Sections 44B, 112B

Section 44BA

Sections 44BB,

104

Section 45

Sections 46, 106

Sections 47, 70,
107

Sections 47AA,
110

Performances and communications deemed non-public when undertaken
in the course of giving or receiving formal education in classroom settings,
when education “not given for profit”

For authorisation liability arising from copies made on machines installed in
libraries and archives, subject to a prescribed notice requirement

For authorisation liability arising from mere use of communications facilities

‘Temporary reproductions/copies made as part of the technical process
of communication where the communication itself does not comprise an
infringement

‘Temporary reproductions/copies incidentally made as a necessary part
of the technical process of using a copy where the copy used does not
comprise an infringement

Inclusion of short extract from a work in a collection for use by place of
education when:

marked as intended for use by place of education
work not published for educational use

collection principally consists of matter in which copyright does not subsist
sufficient acknowledgment of work

restriction on multiple extracts from the same author

Reproduction on approved label for chemical product container (‘approved
label” means a label approved under: (a) Part 2 of the Agvet Code of a

State or of the Northern Territory; or (b) Part 2 of the Agvet Code of the
participating Territories within the meaning of the Agricultural and Veterinary
Chemicals Act 1994: 10(1))

Exploitation of a work for the purpose of giving approved product
information for medicines, tied to an approval under Therapeutic Goods Act
1989 (Cth), s 25AA

Exploitation for the purposes of lawfully sharing healthcare or health
information, tied to the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) and My Health Records Act 2012
(Cth) regulatory regimes

Reading or recitation of an extract of reasonable length from a published
literary or dramatic work in public or the inclusion of it in a broadcast where
sufficient acknowledgment of the work is given

Performance in public of a work or sound recording at a place for residents
or inmates as an aspect of the amenities of the place provided exclusively for
residents, inmates and their guests

Reproducing works or copying sound recordings if done by a broadcaster
in the course of making copies of its broadcasts for retention for 12 months,
where each exception involves a compulsory licence for a third party to.
broadcast that copy with related Copyright Tribunal jurisdiction conferred in
ss 147 and 150

Reproducing works or copying sound recordings or films if done solely for
the purposes of simulcasting in digital form where the exception is lost.

if copy made used for an extraneous purpose and destruction required

by date specified in regulations which was "12 months after the end of

the relevant simulcast period that, in accordance with the Broadcasting
Services Act 1992, is applicable in relation to the broadcasting service that
delivers the simulcast” (Copyright Regulations 1969, regs 4BA, 20) where the
period ended on 31 December 2013 and as such no date is specified in the
Copyright Regulations 2017

Sections 48A, 104A Anything done by a parliamentary librarian for the sole purpose of assisting

Section 49

Section 50

Sections 51, 52,
110A

Section 51AA

Section 105

Section 110

Section 113F

Sections
113G-113K

Sections
113L-113M

Section 199

a member of Parliament in the performance of public duty and where ss 48
and 53 apply particular rules to s 48A in respect of artistic works

Supply (including by communication) of a copy of article or work by libraries
or archives to a person requiring it on the basis of a signed declaration
stating a research or study sole purpose and where ss 48 and 53 apply
particular rules to in respect of artistic works

Inter-library supply (including by communication) of a copy of an article or
work for collection purposes, a parliamentary library purposes (ie. under

s 48) or for on-supply to a person under s 49 and where ss 48 and 53 apply
Particular rules in respect of artistic works

In respect of open to public inspection unpublished works in which more
than 50 years has passed since the death of the author or in respect of
publicly accessible unpublished sound recordings, films in which more

than 50 years has passed since making, when the work, recording or film

is held in a publicly accessible library or archive: reproduction, copying or
communication for research or study purposes ora view to publication” and
where ss 48 and 53 apply particular rules to ss 51 and 52 in respect of artistic
works

Preservation of holdings by National Archives of Australia by the making
of replacement copies in respect of copies open for public inspection and
where ss 48 and 53 apply particular rules in respect of artistic works

The public performance and broadcast rights of sound recordings that
attach to the Australian copyright territory only by reason of first publication
and tied to the denial of secondary use rights to countries not a member of
the Rome Convention — e.g. the USA

Miscellaneous cinematograph film exceptions:
public performance right exception for news-based films 50 years after
principal news events

public performance right exception for works included in term-expired films
when such films are publicly performed

no infringement of copyright in film when sounds from its soundtrack film
are also embodied in a record by any use of that record

Exploitation of copyright by an organisation assisting persons with a
disability for the sole purpose of assisting those persons accessing material
and which can not be obtained in an accessible format in a reasonable time
or at a reasonable price

Exploitation of copyright by libraries accessible to the public, parliamentary
libraries and archives for the purposes of: use for preservation or making a
preservation copy; use for research or making a research copy; use “directly
related to the care or control” of the collection

Exploitation of copyright by a“key cultural institution’ being one if the
body administering it has a statutory remit to develop or maintain a
library/archives collection or is prescribed (reg 16 prescribes the Australian
Broadcasting Corporation, the Australian National University, the Special
Broadcasting Service Corporation) for the purposes of use for preservation
or making a preservation copy

Public performance right not infringed by reception of a broadcast in works,
sound recordings, and films included in a television broadcast

Section 200 Miscellaneous education exceptions:
teacher or student copying in one-off settings
copying or communicating for exam writing or answering

copying and use of a sound broadcast and matter included by educational
institution for its teaching purposes if broadcast intended for education

copying and use of a sound broadcast by educational institution for
teaching purposes

Section 200AAA —_Exploitation of copyright matter by automatic and temporary proxy web
caching by an educational institution “primarily to enable staff and students
to use the system to gain online access for educational purposes” and to the
extent there is overlap, the provision does not limit the exceptions in ss 28,
43A, 438, 111A or 111B

Section 200AB Not-for-profit general uses of copyright by libraries, archives and
educational institutions that satisfy the TRIPS three-step test (special case,
no conflict with normal exploitation and no unreasonable prejudice to legiti-
mate copyright own interests) and fall outside all other existing exceptions
and statutory licences

Section 226(1),(2) of the Patents Act 1990 (Cth) is an unremunerated copyright exception for
literary or artistic works included in certain documents (such as patent specifications) that are open to
public inspection which permits their reproduction in two-dimensional form, communication to the
public and, for literary works, translation.

